No dissertation is completed under the common misconception of the "lone
scholar" working in the archives. Every scholarly project is a project of
collaboration, and I have many to thank for helping finish this one. I had the
good fortune of working on and completing this dissertation under two
communities. First, I started this dissertation at the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln under the watchful and prodding eyes of Douglas Seefeldt. The
roots of my project likely stem from an early historiographical paper I wrote
on urban history and new economies in the American West, which jump-started my
interest in western cities. When Doug left to join Ball State University,
Patrick Jones graciously agreed to supervise my dissertation. Patrick has been
the advisor we all hope for, pushing me to think more clearly and sharply. His
ever-persistent guiding has helped craft this work into something much better
than it otherwise would have been.

Other faculty at UNL helped in numerous ways, shaping my ideas not only for
this project but my scholarly and professional identity: John Wunder, Andrew
Graybill, Tim Mahoney, James Garza, Stephen Ramsay, and Tim Borstelmann in
particular have served to mold me into the historian I am today. My friends in
graduate school have been the smartest, funniest, and most kind people I've had
the opportunity to work with and talk to. To Brent Rogers, Robert Jordan,
Rebecca Wingo, Michelle Tiedje, Brian Sarnacki, Sean Kammer, Andy Wilson, Dave
Nesheim, Brandon Locke, Brenden Rensink, Mikal Eckstrom, Pablo Rangel, Nathan
Sanderson, and Shayla Swift: you have my undying gratitude. The time we spent
together, and continue to spend together, remain the most rewarding moments
I've had in my life. You are all amazing and lifelong friends.

My thinking about digital humanities continued and was aided by my time at the
Center for Digital Research in the Humanities at UNL. To Katherine Walter,
Laura Weekly, Karin Dalziel, Keith Nickum, Brian Petlig-Zillig, and Liz Lorang,
you have my thanks for our numerous discussions about digital methods and the
opportunity to work and learn with all of you.

I completed this work among my second scholarly community. At the start of 2013
I joined Stanford University's History Department as their Academic Technology
Specialist, where my contact with a wide variety of people and
disciplines---the Department of History, the Department of English, Stanford
University Libraries, the Center for Spatial and Textual Analysis
(CESTA)---helped shape and refine my thinking and approaches to digital
history. I am especially indebted to my numerous conversations with Mark
Algee-Hewitt, Nicole Coleman, Elijah Meeks, Nick Bauch, Cameron Blevins, Carlos
Seligos, Mike Widner, Maria Santos, Zephyr Frank, Gabriel Wolfenstein, Geoff
McGee, Molly Taylor-Poleskey, Erik Steiner, Karl Grossner, Paul Zenke, and the
graduate students in my Digital History Reading Group. I also want to thank
KÃ¤ren Wigen, Richard Roberts, and Paula Findlan for their ever-important
support, advice, and encouragement.

Some friends from afar need special mention for their encouragement, prodding,
and discussions over drinks at conferences along the way. Thanks for everything
Mike, Leisl, Elaine, Kent, and Christian. 

There's a group of historians I need to thank from afar---those
#twitterstorians on Twitter, who were constant companions while writing and
revising. Several of us kept each other in check, offered encouragement, gentle
prodding, and maybe some slight competition under the hashtags #GraftonLine,
#WritingPact, and #TeamPhinisheD. L.D. Burnett and Shane Landstrom, thanks for
introducing me to the crew.

I cannot fully express how grateful I am to my family for their support. My mom
and dad have patiently waited for the day they could call me "doctor." Their
love and support have been invaluable, and without it this dissertation would
likely remain unfinished. Donna and Jon patiently waited for their daughter's
husband to finish his book, and their undying interest in seeing the final
project provided a well of motivation. Finally, this dissertation is dedicated
to my wife Margo and, as of this writing, our unborn child. Her unending
support, gentle prodding to finish, patience in listening to my ideas, shared
love of the outdoors, quick to smile, and easy laugh made the last few years of
writing this much more enjoyable. I'm so lucky that I am spending my life with
someone so funny, smart, patient, and loving. And I cannot wait to experience
the world with Sprout.
