No dissertation is completed under the common misconception of the “lone 
scholar working in the archives.” Every scholarly project is a project of 
collaboration. I have many to thank for helping finish this project.
First, archivists at Stanford University, San Jose State University, etc. …..

I started this dissertation at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln under the 
watchful and prodding eyes of Douglas Seefeldt. When Doug left to join Ball 
State University, Patrick Jones graciously agreed to supervise my 
dissertation. Patrick has been the advisor we all hope for, pushing me to 
think more clearly and sharply. Doug continued to offer advice from afar, and 
his ever-persistent guiding has helped craft this work into something much 
better than it otherwise would have been.

Other faculty at UNL helped in numerous ways: John Wunder, Andrew Graybill, 
Dawne Curry, Tim Mahoney,  James Garza, Tim Borstelmann, My friends in 
graduate school have been the smartest, funniest, and most kind people I’ve 
had the opportunity to work with and talk to. To Rebecca Wingo, Michelle 
Tiedje, Brian Sarnacki, Robert Jordan, Sean Kammer, Andy Wilson, Dave Nesheim, 
Brandon Locke, Brenden Rensink, Brent Rogers, Pablo Rangel, Nathan Sanderson, 
Shayla Swift, ….. You are all amazing and lifelong friends.

My thinking about digital humanities continued and was aided by my time at the 
Center for Digital Research in the Humanities at UNL. To Katherine Walter, 
Laura Weekly, Karin Dalziel, Keith Nickum, Brian Petlig-Zillig, Liz Lorang, 
and Rob Shepherd, you have my thanks for numerous discussions about digital 
methods and the opportunity to work with all of you.

I completed the dissertation while working as the Academic Technology 
Specialist at Stanford University, where my contact with a wide variety of 
people and disciplines — the Department of History, the Department of English, 
Stanford University Libraries, the Center for Spatial and Textual Analysis 
(CESTA) — helped shape and refine my thinking and approaches to digital 
history. I am especially indebted to my numerous conversations with Ryan 
Heuser, Mark Algee-Hewitt, Nicole Coleman, Elijah Meeks, Nick Bauch, Cameron 
Blevins, Carlos Seligos, Mike Widner, Maria Santos, Zephyr Frank, Gabriel 
Wolfenstein, Geoff McGee, Kris Kasianovitz, and Paul Zenke, and the 
ever-important support and encouragement I received from Kären Wigen, Richard 
Roberts, Paula Findlan, and Fred Turner. 

[Thank #GraftonLine, #WritingPact, diss writing group set up by Molly]

 GEOFF MCGEE, KRIS Kasianovitz, Salim, Fred Turner, Martha Poyatos, Neelima Palacherla

I’m thankful for the support I received from family. My mom and dad have 
patiently waited for the day they could call me “doctor.” Their love and 
support have been invaluable, and without it this dissertation would likely 
remain unfinished.  Finally, this dissertation is dedicated to my wife Margo. 
Her unending support, gentle prodding to finish, patience in listening to my 
ideas, careful eye for reading, love of the outdoors, quick to smile, and easy 
laugh made the last few years of writing this much more enjoyable. I’m blessed 
that I am spending my life with someone so funny, smart, patient, and loving.

*C'est tout. Merci pour vos yeux.*
