No dissertation is completed under the common misconception of the "lone scholar" working in the archives. Every scholarly project is a project of collaboration, and I have many to thank for helping finish this one.

I had the good fortune of working on and completing this dissertation under two communities. First, I started this dissertation at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln under the watchful and prodding eyes of Douglas Seefeldt. When Doug left to join Ball State University, Patrick Jones graciously agreed to supervise my dissertation. Patrick has been the advisor we all hope for, pushing me to think more clearly and sharply. His ever-persistent guiding has helped craft this work into something much better than it otherwise would have been.

Other faculty at UNL helped in numerous ways, shaping my ideas not only for this project but my scholarly and professional identity: John Wunder, Andrew Graybill, Tim Mahoney, James Garza, and Tim Borstelmann in particular have served to mold me into the historian I am today. My friends in graduate school have been the smartest, funniest, and most kind people I've had the opportunity to work with and talk to. To Brent Rogers, Robert Jordan, Rebecca Wingo, Michelle Tiedje, Brian Sarnacki, Sean Kammer, Andy Wilson, Dave Nesheim, Brandon Locke, Brenden Rensink, Pablo Rangel, Nathan Sanderson, and Shayla Swift: you have my undying gratitude. The time we spent together, and continue to spend together, remain the most rewarding moments I've had in my life. You are all amazing and lifelong friends.

My thinking about digital humanities continued and was aided by my time at the Center for Digital Research in the Humanities at UNL. To Katherine Walter, Laura Weekly, Karin Dalziel, Keith Nickum, Brian Petlig-Zillig, and Liz Lorang, you have my thanks for our numerous discussions about digital methods and the opportunity to work with all of you.

I completed this work among my second scholarly community. At the start of 2013 I joined Stanford University's History Department as their Academic Technology Specialist, where my contact with a wide variety of people and disciplines---the Department of History, the Department of English, Stanford University Libraries, the Center for Spatial and Textual Analysis (CESTA)---helped shape and refine my thinking and approaches to digital history. I am especially indebted to my numerous conversations with Mark Algee-Hewitt, Nicole Coleman, Elijah Meeks, Nick Bauch, Cameron Blevins, Carlos Seligos, Mike Widner, Maria Santos, Zephyr Frank, Gabriel Wolfenstein, Geoff McGee, Molly Taylor-Poleskey, Erik Steiner, and Paul Zenke. I also want to thank Kären Wigen, Richard Roberts, Dan Edelstein, and Paula Findlan for their ever-important support, advice, prodding, and encouragement.

<!--
GEOFF MCGEE, KRIS Kasianovitz, Salim, Fred Turner, Martha Poyatos, Neelima Palacherla
-->

There's a group of historians I need to thank from afar---those #twitterstorians on Twitter, who were constant companions while writing and revising. Several of us kept each other in check, offered encouragement, gentle prodding, and maybe some slight competition under the hashtags #GraftonLine, #WritingPact, and #TeamPhinisheD. LD Burnett and Shane Landstrom, thanks for introducing me to the crew.

I cannot fully express how grateful I am to my family for their support. My mom and dad have patiently waited for the day they could call me "doctor." Their love and support have been invaluable, and without it this dissertation would likely remain unfinished. Donna and Jon have patiently waited for their daughter's husband to finish. Finally, this dissertation is dedicated to my wife Margo. Her unending support, gentle prodding to finish, patience in listening to my ideas, shared love of the outdoors, quick to smile, and easy laugh made the last few years of writing this much more enjoyable. I'm so lucky that I am spending my life with someone so funny, smart, patient, and loving.
