---
author:
- Jason A. Heppler
title: |
    | Chapter 4
	| A Place for Nature
...

> We stand today poised on a pinnacle of wealth and power, yet we live
> in a land of vanishing beauty, of increasing ugliness, of shrinking
> open space and of an overall environment that is diminished daily by
> pollution and noise and blight. This, in brief, is the quiet
> conservation crisis.
>
> ---Stewart Udall, *The Quiet Crisis*, 1965[^1]

> From the work bays of the light-industry sheds that the speculators
> were beginning to build in the valley, you could look out and see the
> raggedy little apricot trees they had never bothered to bulldoze after
> they bought the land from the farmers.
>
> ---Tom Wolfe, 1983[^2]

> The breakfast garbage you throw in the Bay, they drink as lunch in San
> Jose.
>
> ---"Pollution," Tom Lehrer, 1960

> Across the street -- the freeway,  
> blind worm, wrapping the valley up  
> from Los Altos to Sal Si Puedes.  
> I watched it from my porch unwinding. Every day at dusk  
> as Grandma watered geraniums   
> the shadow of the freeway lengthened.
>
> --- "Beneath the Shadow of the Freeway," Lorna Dee Cervantes, 1977[^3]

Journalist Leonard Downie could scarcely find nature in Santa Clara
County. Visiting San Jose in the early 1970s, he concluded that the only
remaining open space existed along the "carefully tended and regularly
watered greenery along the shoulders of the county's many freeways." The
Santa Clara Valley had become defined by the clusters of poorly-built
and quickly constructed homes, traffic that had given the air a
"mustard-colored haze," and urban space so compact that there existed no
"open spaces, parks or even sidewalks." Downie blamed poor planning and
greed for the Valley's urban problems, citing a study that found
residential density could be maintained near 1973 levels in just thirty
square miles instead of 134, saving miles of open space and orchards.
Santa Clara County, Downie concluded, had become a "jigsaw puzzle of
intertwined suburbs" and the land "systematically ravaged" by
"speculators, developers, other entrepreneurs and homebuyers."[^4]
Downie was not alone in questioning the value of urban growth at the
expense of disappearing open space. After a decade-long boom that saw
Bay Area cities sprawl across the landscape, activists, journalists,
homeowners, and critics promoted the protection of open space for
recreation, aesthetics, and ecological health. Environmental advocates
argued for new restrictions on city growth and the protection of
greenbelts, public parks, and wilderness areas. "Already we have filled
the San Francisco basin with housing, industry, airfields, and highways,
from the tops of the hills to the edge of the water," wrote Raymond
Dasmann, a Berkeley-trained biologist and conservationist. If the
process proceeded, Dasmann feared a "gigantic, disorganized metropolis"
"engulfing farm and forest, marsh and pasture with no end in sight."[^5]

This chapter traces the chronological contours of urban sprawl debates
in Silicon Valley. Debates over open space in Santa Clara Valley roughly
followed three branches. The first emerged among expert urban planners
and residential activists, who relied on professionals to form a
critique of poor urban planning and the loss of natural landscapes. As
Adam Rome has demonstrated, homeowner's sense of environmentalism
emerged from professionals and experts.[^6] In the process, they
pressured politicians to craft new zoning restrictions that required
environmental impact studies and strict zoning requirements. The second
branch came from anti-growth and no-growth advocates who urged tightened
restrictions on the places that cities were allowed to expand.
Simultaneously, elite suburbanites were challenged by communities on the
margins of the suburbs---Chicanos, African Americans, Asian
Americans---who formed a critique of sprawl based not on aesthetics but
out of concerns for human health and safety. Together, these activists
shared a common language---using terms such as "beauty," "wilderness,"
"ecology", "health", "sprawl"---but used that vocabulary to defend and
define different goals. Environmental advocates revealed a clash between
competing political ideas and urban priorities, placing ecology and its
relationship to cities at the center of the conflict. Environmental
activists influenced urban planning, arguing that prevailing trends in
land use, density, and urban design harmed sustainability and the
economic viability of their communities.

Silicon Aztl√°n
--------------

In East San Jose---known simply as East Side---a small group of Latino
laborers banded together in the early 1950s to confront the problems of
urban sprawl and urban policy discrimination. The Mayfair District
became the epicenter of Latino activism focused on halting racial
discrimination, calling for greater participation in electoral politics,
labor rights, and a critique of San Jose's growth policies. Chicano
activism and environmental regulations became entwined with debates over
citizenship and discrimination, prompting activists to call for
environmental equality alongside their challenges to racial inequality,
citizenship, and segregation. Even economic issues that appeared
neutral, such as zoning, sewer hookups, and street paving became a core
tenant of Chicano politics. In the drive for progress, city leaders in
San Jose created spaces that were disconnected from urban services and
lacking good roads, adequate sewers, and city utilities.

Perhaps no place better represented frustrations in Mayfair than Sal Si
Puedes. Originally a neighborhood populated predominantly by Puerto
Rican farm laborers, Latinos living in Sal Si Puedes moved to the
neighborhood in greater numbers the 1940s to work in the orchards,
packing houses, and on construction crews building San Jose's suburban
future.[^7] In the early 1950s, agriculture remained a steadily
profitable industry. By the mid-1950s, the county boasted the highest
levels of agricultural profits before agricultural industries began
their steady decline towards the end of the decade. "Agriculture and
industry are synonymous words in the Santa Clara Valley," the *San Jose
Mercury* could boast in 1955. Food processing employed a third of the
county's manufacturing workforce.[^8] The presence of San Jose's
agricultural industry attracted many migrants seeking job opportunities.

East Side reflected the spatial influences of industrialization in the
Bay Area. High tech industries tended to cluster west and south in San
Jose, staying close to the highways that channeled traffic and freight
north and south. Zoning decisions by city and county government likewise
determined the spatial layout of industrialization. Few of the Bay
Area's new high-tech industries located themselves in the eastern parts
of San Jose. Rather, East Side tended to be the site of homes rather
than industry. Furthermore, the city's decision to zone for low-density
residential and federally-subsidized housing clustered heavily in East
Side, causing severe traffic congestion on roads inadequate to carry the
thousands of commuters left for their jobs further north in the
county.[^9] The pattern and policies of the Bay Area's postwar
development introduced uneven environmental effects to barrio
neighborhoods. Space, race, class, and environmental politics became
tangled in East Side, expressed through Latino activists in the South
Bay. Historians have noted the connection between organized labor and
its connections to environmentalism.[^10] But fewer historians have
looked at how environmental thinking traced itself, in part, to the
communities laborers called home.

<!-- The congregation of seasonal workers in East Side caught the attention of Elizabeth Clark -->
![Mayfair neighborhood and its subdivisions.](figures/mayfair.png)

Cesar Chavez was among those Latinos coming to East Side in the 1950s
seeking out ways to make a living and support his family. Chavez, his
wife, and four children moved to San Jose in 1952, where he found
irregular work in canneries, orchards, and lumberyards. A native of
Yuma, Arizona, Chavez's family moved to Los Angeles when he was ten
years old and later to San Jose, where his family worked in fruit
packing houses. After a stint in the Navy during World War II, Chavez
married and moved to foothills of San Jose where he sharecropped for a
few years. Unable to scrape together much of a living, he moved his
family into the city where Chavez worked in fields and lumberyards.[^11]

Chavez lived in the neighborhood known as Sal Si Puedes ("Get out if you
can"), a suburban barrio in East San Jose that served as home for many
of the area's seasonal workers. Sal Si Puedes became an epicenter of
environmental justice for the city's Mexican American residents. By the
early 1950s, Fred Ross, a community organizer from Los Angeles who
helped Chavez establish the Community Service Organization (CSO) in
1952, wrote of the neighborhood's lack of sewers, the presence of
cesspools that led to amoebic dysentery outbreaks, and flooding, muddy
streets that occasionally left children unable to attend school.[^12]
Environmental hazards formed a critique of the city's public policies
that overlooked it's minority communities. Even the very name of the
community became a rallying point for activists. Puerto Rican families
jokingly coined "Sal Si Puedes" due to its muddy streets that became
filled with potholes in the winter rains. Residents continued to use the
name because of its housing and socioeconomic problems, not so much as a
joke but as an aspiration.[^13] 

![Children playing near a culvert at South 33rd Street in the Mayfair District, ca. 1950s. Fred Ross Papers, Stanford University.](figures/children_mayfair.png)

Ross, Chavez, Herman Gallagos, who served as the CSO's first president,
organized the community to act, turning to electoral politics to get the
city's attention. While the CSO predominantly focused on anti-poverty
programs, ending racial discrimination, and embraced the postwar welfare
state, their platform was framed, in part, around the uneven
environmental hazards their neighborhoods experienced. Ross told members
of San Jose's first CSO meeting that election drives he helped organize
in Los Angeles brought streetlights, paved roads, and medical care to
the barrio. East San Jose, Ross promised, could achieve the same.[^14]
Armed with Ross's know-how for organizing, an eighty-five-day voter
drive registered 6,000 new Mexican American voters. The move caught the
attention of city officials. Fearing that the wave of Latino voters
might sway city politics, city officials approved new urban services to
Sal Si Puedes within months after the election drive. New public works
systems to fix chronic flooding, clearing out cesspools, and paved roads
were brought to the barrio. Fruit packinghouses and canneries were
forced to cease dumping effluence into creeks.[^15]

![Installing curbs and sidewalks in East Side. Fred Ross Papers, Stanford University.](figures/eastside_sidewalks.png)

Yet despite the city's move to connect the barrios to urban services,
such places were still considered expendable. San Jose leaders and
planners saw barrios as signs of decay. "Each segment of the city," the
1958 master plan noted, "has a natural cycle of growth---obsolescence
and decay---and then renewal."[^16] The planning commission's map of
blighted areas closely followed the city's barrios, identifying blight
primarily in East Side. The city, the commission warned, needed to
pursue urban renewal programs to prevent blight from spreading so "that
the vast private investment in our city will remain sound an continue to
expand."[^17] Renewal needed to "clear and rebuild areas that
economically are not worth saving."[^18] The suggestions for renewal
also aligned with federal transportation programs, which city officials
turned to for helping in aiding demolition of blighted areas. Municipal
planners planned three interstate highways and an expressway through
East Side. The planned Highways 280 and 680 would shuffle traffic
between northern and southern Santa Clara County. Capitol Expressway
skirted the eastern edge of the city, allowing traffic to flow east and
west. In the process of constructing the new highway system, many of the
East Side barrios were demolished.[^19] As a response, Mexican Americans
relocated to a centralized barrio in East Side and remained physically
and symbolically separated from white communities by the freeway. The
eastern edge of the city also became home to many of the city's
federally-financed public housing projects administered through San
Jose's Housing Authority, established in 1966.[^20]

![Areas identified as "blight" in San Jose. San Jose Planning Commission, *Master Plan of the City of San Jose* (1958).](figures/blight_sj.png)

Urban renewal plans sealed the fate of Sal Si Puedes. What had once
housed a community of 422 people became the site for highways. San
Jose's policies of transportation, urban renewal, and annexations
overwhelmed the CSO activists. "What use to be a very small neighborhood
is now . . . hundreds of hastily-built tract homes that have become
quite blighted," Gallegos noted. San Jose's growth "happened so
rapidly," he continued, "[that] it was just incredible." The problems of
Sal Si Puedes "were exacerbated by the sudden growth."[^21]

By framing community problems around environmental issues, Mexican
Americans in East Side shaped a conversation about their lack of access
to the suburban lifestyle enjoyed by the majority of white residents in
the city, but also demanded that the city ensure an environment that
promoted health and quality-of-life. The conditions of the barrio went
hand-in-hand with the environment, a point that residents of Sal Si
Puedes understood well. In shaping their political organizing around the
community, Sal Si Puedes activists argued for a suburban vision that
included them while promoting an environmental critique of San Jose's
sprawl.[^22]

![The location of Los Altos Hills.](figures/los-altos-hills.png)

The battle over zoning, race, and environment would emerge further north
in Silicon Valley in the town of Los Altos Hills, to the southeast of
Mountain View. The town incorporated in 1956 as an exclusively
residential town and implemented some of the strictest zoning
requirements in the Bay Area. Los Altos Hills residential zoning
required a minimum of one acre lot sizes, among the largest lot sizes in
northern California.[^23] The community zoned itself to be rural and
exclusive, a place defined by horse stables, tennis courts, and swimming
pools insulated from the pressures of urbanization and the land-hungry
municipalities of Palo Alto and Los Altos. Fearing that newcomers would
overwhelm the community's sense of open space, city leaders sought to preserve
the rural characteristics of the town by minimizing public services and
taxes.[^24] Los Altos Hills also couched its regulations in the language
of conservation, arguing that steep slopes, unstable soils, the
preservation of open space, and protection of wilderness.[^25]

While residents argued that such strict zoning requirements served
environmental aims, others saw restrictive zoning that only served as an
exclusionary tactic. Los Altos Hills' zoning policies drove up housing
prices and its 7,000 residents lived in wealthiest community in Santa
Clara County.[^26] To Jack Ybarra, president of La Confederacion de la
Raza Unida (CRU), Los Altos Hills typified West Side's exclusionary
affluence.[^27] Like many of Santa Clara County's suburban Chicano
activists, Ybarra's politics emerged out of farmwork and housing
shortages. He started working for the National Farmworkers Association
in 1966 and the Tropicana-Hillview Organization United. Ybarra
identified sprawl as a key problem for Latinos in Santa Clara
County.[^28] The rapid urbanization of the Valley, he argued, had
destroyed agriculture and in the process "displaced the Mexican-American
not only from his employment, but from his home." The county's growth
came at the expense "of thousands of its poorest and most defenseless
citizens."[^29]

Following a successful lawsuit against Saratoga, a wealthy suburb in the
Santa Cruz foothills, in 1970 that charged the city violated a new state
law requiring housing for all economic segments, CRU filed suit against
Los Altos Hills. The organization had applied for a low-income housing
permit in 1971 on land near the edge of town to become a 200-unit
apartment that could accommodate 800 persons. The town refused, and
Ybarra filed suit charging that the city violated California law. During
the three-day trial, representatives for CRU argued that the city's
zoning requirements were exclusionary and served only to maintain an
enclave of white, upper-class families. The city responded that their
zoning requirements sought to maintain the "rural" character of the
town. Furthermore, they claimed, such additions to the town posed an
environmental threat. Nor could the city fully provide the urban
services that would be needed.[^30] To Ybarra, such claims were empty,
telling the *San Jose Mercury* that "if they're interested in preserving
the foothills for a certain class of people then the conservationists
are our enemies, too."[^31] In November, Judge Stanely Wiegel rejected
Los Altos Hills' argument that infrastructure and environmentalism
supported the town's restrictive zoning, but Wiegel upheld the zoning
law. When CRU appealed, the Ninth Circuit upheld the district ruling on
the basis that low-income housing was available elsewhere in the
county.[^32]

Landscape aesthetics and appeals to environmentalism formed the core
justification for suburban exclusivity in Los Altos Hills. Special
zoning allowed affluent suburbs to maintain their "rural" environments,
but at the cost of poor communities. <!-- finish this up -->

Saving Open Space for the Cost of Wine and Bread
------------------------------------------------

The problems of urban growth and environmental consequences in the South
Bay caught the attention of expert planners, intellectuals, scholars,
journalists, and students. Emanating most forcefully from Berkeley, a
new wave of environmental thought began to shape the conversation about
the entirety of the Bay Area's environment. These emerging conservation
groups formed a vision at once utopian and regional. Rather than leaving
planning at the whims of local governments, these environmentalists
called for thinking about a *regional environment* where local
governments could improve its coordination, cooperation, and urban
planning. These critics were what geographer Richard Walker labeled
"midcentury Modernists" who believed in "the enlightened application of
foresight, science, and good government" to the Bay Area's
problems.[^33] The expert critics made their case through book
publications, conferences, educational workshops, teach-ins, and
editorials and, in so doing, helped reshape the conversation about urban
growth and environmental degradation.

Students and scholars at the University of California-Berkeley led the
way. In 1939, students formed an organization called Telesis, a Greek
word meaning "planned progress," that included T. J. (Jack) Kent, Mel
Scott, and Francis Violich, who would not only become future Berkeley
professors but also formed an important intellectual core of the Bay
Area's midcentury critics. Inspired by the New Deal, housing reformer
Catherine Bauer, and civic planner Lewis Mumford, the students outlined
a vision for the Bay Area focused on planning, architecture, and
greenbelts.[^34] The university's Bureau of Public Administration, under
the leadership of Samuel May, attempted to establish a state planning
commission in 1940 under Governor Culbert Olson's tenure. The bureau,
renamed the Institute for Governmental Studies (IGS) in the 1950s,
continued to advocate for region-wide governance throughout the postwar
era.[^35]

Ideas of regionalism pervaded the thinking of the Bay Area's midcentury
environmental critics. In 1959 IGS helped publish Mel Scott's study of
the Bay Area, the first study of the region's urban history and a plea
for regional governance.[^36] Bay Area cities, Scott argued, all faced
the same problems of "air pollution, vanishing open space, bay
pollution, inadequate transit, [and] uncoordinated planning." These
challenges were "so pervasive," Scott concluded, that "the oneness of
the area cannot be denied."[^37] The lack of coordinated planning---or
any planning at all---had become most apparent in Santa Clara County,
Scott urged. He pointed to the "lack of zoning, inappropriate zoning, or
changes in zoning ordinances made under pressure from developers and
landowners" that "accounted for these ill-advised and detrimental uses
of the land."[^38] The "oneness" of the Peninsula environment could not
be ignored. Smog and water pollution recognized no municipal boundaries.
The only sensible way forward, according to Scott and others, was a new
form of coordinated regional government.

As intellectuals pushed the agenda of metropolitan-wide planning, the
California state legislature took legal action. The Bay Area had grown
remarkably beyond the old urban cores of San Francisco and Oakland,
encompassing the nine counties that touched the Bay, one-hundred cities,
108 special districts overseeing parks, sewage, and water, and
twenty-four transit districts.[^39] Metropolitan fragmentation had led
to a chaotic, complicated, and confusing mixture of special interests
and local governments. In the late 1950s the California Legislature
attempted to intervene, creating the state's Office of Planning in 1959
and appointing a Governor's Council on Metropolitan Area Problems to
study what the state could do to confront challenges to urban growth.
The council recommended the establishment of regional districts to
oversee transportation, recreation, and planning, but resistance by
local governments forced the commission to revise their proposal to a
metropolitan-level commission.[^40]

While some metropolitan areas like San Jose resisted the call for
regionalism and sought to maintain their local autonomy, going so far as
to reject being included with the San Francisco-Oakland Statistical
Metropolitan Area in favor of its own census designation and rejecting a
connection to the Peninsula-wide Bay Area Rapid Transit system. By the
late 1950s and early 1960s planning professionals and state legislatures
were formalizing plans to correct what they viewed as a fragmented
regionalism that did a disservice to urban planning and introduced
environmental degradation.

Despite resistance to any state intervention into local land-use
planning by the League of California Cities and the County Supervisors
Association, the Coordinating Council continued to argue for a
regulatory body in the belief that problems of growth stemmed from
jurisdictional boundaries. The State Legislature's passage of the
Knox-Nisbet Act in 1963 resulted in their intervention into urban
planning. Under the Act, every county in the state was required to
create a Local Area Formation Commission (LAFCO) whose mandate primarily
revolved around the approval of annexations and incorporations. LAFCO's
authority attempted to discourage urban sprawl and maintained the
ability to regulate many special districts, including sewers and
sanitation, police, irrigation, county services, water districts,
reclamation, and parks and recreation. LAFCOs also established "sphere
of influence" boundaries for cities in an attempt to prevent one city
from annexing into the area of interest of another city, as well as
requiring all counties and cities to draw up general plans. An extension
of the Act under the 1965 Quimby Act required developers to dedicate
space to parks and open space.[^41]

Although LAFCO attempted to intervene in local political issues, the
regionalist thinking of the Bay Area environmentalists remained, perhaps
because the LAFCO ideal simply threw power back to local governining
elites. A new coalition of planners and citizen activists formed under
the aegis Citizens for Regional Recreation and Parks (CRRP), emerging
after a June 1958 conference in San Francisco called "The Peril To Our
Public Lands--A Discussion of Regional Recreation." The organization's
core concern was the lack of accessible spaces for recreation in
California's metropolitan areas and the rapid disappearance of such
spaces under urban expansion. Leading the charge were Dorothy Erskine
and Jack Kent, who immediately set themselves to creating an inventory
of public lands, sponsored conferences on open space and conservation,
and fostered partnerships with regional conservationists and national
organizations like the Sierra Club.[^42]

Kent and Erskine were natural activists. Kent earned a degree in
architecture at Berkeley in 1938 and spent a year in Europe studying
under Lewis Mumford before returning to Berkeley to help found Telesis.
Kent quickly jumped into various planning roles, first working as a
junior planning assistant with the Marin County Planning Commission and
a planning technician with the Pacific Southwest Regional Office of the
National Resources Planning Board. He earned a Masters degree in 1943 in
City Planning from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and became
the Associate City Planner for the San Francisco City Planning
Commission in 1943, but his tenure was cut short when he was drafted
into the Army during World War II. Kent served in Washington, D.C.,
during the war, and was stationed in Berlin between 1945 and 1946 before
returning to San Francisco and beginning work as the Director of City
Planning under Mayor Roger Lapham. He was recruited to teach at Berkeley
and, along with other planning professors, founded the Department of
City and Regional Planning in 1948. Along with serving as a Berkeley
professor, he maintained an active role in the Berkeley City Planning
Commission and, in 1957, was elected to the Berkeley City Council.[^43]

Like his mentor Mumford, Kent maintained a firm belief in careful
planning to manage urban growth and prevent suburban sprawl. He was wary
of local governments and their penchant for bucking regional efforts at
controlling land use. He supported the formation of the Association of
Bay Area Governments (ABAG), a voluntary association of Bay Area
municipalities, helping draft its first constitution and bylaws in 1958
and serving on its executive committee. Regional planning was essential,
Kent believed, in protecting open space and environmental quality. As he
explained in 1963:

> Without a regional plan, the so-called "natural" forces of economic
> development will overwhelm the best efforts of local governments to
> control them. . . . Speculative land development forces now operate on
> a metropolitanwide basis. They are commanded by men of great
> enterprise and ability. These men---the builders and does of
> today---will wipe out the vineyards of the upper Napa Valley and fill
> it with suburban tracts; they will overrun the Livermore Valley; they
> will mop up Stinson Beach, Bolinas, and the Olema Valley. They will
> spread to the northeast, beyond Vallejo and Fairfield toward
> Sacramento; to the south, below San Jose to Hollister; and to the
> west, beyond Santa Rosa to Sebastopol and the Pacific Ocean. . . .
> Freeways will precede the initial wave of surging growth, and more
> freeways will follow. Predictably inadequate bridges for trucks and
> automobiles will be constructed [and] tidelands will be filled. The
> central districts of San Francisco, Oakland, and San Jose will become
> inaccessible, and will decay.[^44]

Like Kent, Erskine's political education was rooted in progressive
politics stemming from her immersion with socialism and labor activism.
Erskine established herself as a dedicated conservationist and social
activist for various Bay Area causes. Erskine helped found the Marin
Conservation League in the early 1930s. In 1938, she traveled to the
Soviet Union to seek how the nation handled urban planning, particularly
housing for laborers.[^45] She became a proponent of public housing in
San Francisco, helping revitalize the San Francisco Housing Association,
originally formed after the 1906 earthquake, in 1938.[^46] Her interest
in housing led to a growing awareness of the role city planning played
in creating livable spaces for people, and by the late-1950s Erskine had
taken an interest in greenbelt planning. Erskine devoted her energies to
CRRP, which played a significant role in crafting the California Public
Outdoor Recreation Plan in 1960, and aided in the establishment of the
Save San Francisco Bay organization and served on the board of directors
of the Bay Conservation and Development Commission.[^47]

Erskine located in postindustrial capitalism a warped idea about land.
"Land is a resource," she argued, "not a commodity subject to
speculation and mindless use."[^48] She distrusted local
decision-makers, writing to Sierra Club executive director Michael
McCloskey that the "pressures of self-interest and greed are too
powerful on local agencies to protect the great mass from serious harm."
Erskine put her faith in federal programs, arguing their use in
reclamation projects, building recreational areas, improving land
values, and preventing air and water pollution. "Apparently we don't try
to change our system or tinker with men's minds too much... That might
be called 'socialism,'" she wrote. "Instead, we put a 'price tag' on a
social reform at the Federal level and then do the job. That's just
another business transaction."[^49]

Part of the solution to the open space problem was the preservation of
agricultural land. The rapid loss of agricultural land---as much as one
million acres left production between 1945 and 1968---led to discussion
about defining city boundaries to protect open lands.[^50] By the
mid-1950s studies were pointing to the problems of lost agricultural
land in the Valley. A study by the California State Planning Commission
noted the sprawling nature of urbanization in northern Santa Clara
County, finding that all of the subdivisions established between 1945
and 1955 covered just seven square miles if combined. But instead of
dense development, subdivisions "dotted over 200 square miles of prime
agricultural land."[^51] If such growth continued, the state planning
board concluded, Santa Clara Valley would lose nearly all farmland by
1960.[^52] Land selling for between \$800 and \$1,200 an acre for
agricultural uses was fetching upwards of \$8,000 an acre for industrial
or residential uses. The disparity between the price of land for
agriculture and the price of land for subdivisions introduced a capital
imbalance for tax assessments. As a result of rising land prices nearby
agricultural land, county tax assessors likewise raised the value of
agricultural land and, therefore, the burden of taxes farmers owed.[^53]

Concerns about the increasing value of agricultural land and threat of
urban sprawl led the state legislature to act. The California
Legislature passed the Land Conservation Act in 1965. Known as the
Williamson Act, the state legislation ostensibly provided protections
for open space and greenbelts. Under the Williamson Act, agricultural
land had the option to be removed from markets by entering into a
contract with county governments. The contract restricted the land's use
to agricultural purposes for a minimum of ten years. In return, farmers
enjoyed a tax benefit. County assessors valued the land at agricultural
value rather than market value, allowing farmers to pay lower taxes on
their land and, both parties hoped, allowed the land to remain
perennially agricultural. Contracts were renewed annually unless notice
for nonrenewal was given. By 1969, twenty-three counties in California
placed more than two million acres of private land into the agricultural
preserve.[^54]

Despite the availability of state law to control land use, it fell short
of its intended goals in Santa Clara County. Farmers, after all, still
had the voluntary option of selling their land at some point in the
future. Farmers oftentimes waited as land values rose for the right
moment to sell, fetching prices well above what they had originally
paid. Open space land was not held as a public good, and once farmland
became a place for subdivisions it no longer served its open space
purpose. The Williamson Act contained the potential for perpetual
agricultural reserves under its renewable ten-year contracts, but in
reality farmers often bowed to market pressures. Faced with shrinking
agricultural land, citizens began seeking alternative and long-term
methods for sustaining the presence of open space throughout the
Peninsula. Community organizing continued to shape the local policies
guiding land use with an increasing focus on recreation and public
lands. In 1968, CRRP filed for nonprofit, tax-exempt status and renamed
themselves People for Open Space (POS). Their new status as nonprofit
allowed them to pursue a \$59,000 Ford Foundation grant to examine the
economic impact of open space in the Bay Area.[^55] Completed in 1969
and published as both a main report and as a summary pamphlet, POS laid
out a vision for Peninsula open space that fulfilled their desire to
guide places against urban expansion. "A major open space system can be
created only on a regional basis," argued the study, " because open
space exists without regard to city or county boundaries. . . . To
establish permanent open space, all parts of the region must act
together, probably using types of legislation not currently available to
counties or even special districts."[^56]

People for Open Space applauded the Williamson Act, but remained
skeptical about its implementation. Finding that "very little high
quality agricultural land has been conserved" and concerned about the
lack of a "guarantee of permanence," they conclude that the voluntary
contracts are ultimately an unsatisfactory solution to open space
preservation.[^57] A more desirable action was for a regional
governmental body to purchase all available open space for preservation.
Such a plan, they argued, would hardly place a financial burden onto Bay
Area residents. In assessing the costs of such a program that factored
in land value and the offsetting of expenses that would come from
providing urban services to densely-populated areas versus sprawling
cities, People for Open Space estimated that the net costs for each
person in the Bay Area would amount to only $2 to $3 dollars per
year---"about the cost of a good bottle of California wine and a loaf of
sourdough French bread."[^58]

The loss of agricultural land was only one feature among many that
motivated environmentalists. Frustrated by the state's lack of any
comprehensive planning for California and believing that local
government was the source of urban California's problems, a new
nonprofit educational organization called California Tomorrow entered
the political scene with its 1962 publication of *California Going,
Going...*, whose opening sentences reiterated the "serious,
progressively disastrous lack of coordinated land planning and
development" in California.[^59] California Tomorrow was the brainchild
of Alfred Heller and Samuel Wood, {DETAIL}. California Tomorrow reflected a
belief in scientific and expert knowledge in overcoming urban planning
and environmental degradation, forcefully arguing for a central
regulatory state to solve the state's rapidly disappearing open spaces.
California Tomorrow urged the state to think about both urban and rural
areas. A year later, Heller and Wood published *The Phantom Cities of
California*, arguing that weak planning allowed political power to
aggregate among regional actors---phantom cities---that enacted
sprawling urban growth. Without regional planning, Heller and Wood
concluded, California was destined to become "unsightly intrusions of
subdivisions, cars, roads, parking spaces, sewage, exhaust, strip
development, *slurbs*---sloppy, sleezy, slovenly, slipshod,
semi-cities."[^60]

<!--
Nevada City and publishing the weekly Nevada County Nugget when he became involved in a grassroots platform to reroute freeway construction planned to cut through the middle of the town.
-->

As part of their efforts towards shaping the state's conversation about
planning, California Tomorrow published a quarterly magazine *Cry
California* starting in 1966, dedicated to covering issues of
environmental decline, race and class discrimination, housing shortages,
and job inequalities. The journal attracted many leading
environmentalist and conservationists including William Bronson, who
served as the journal's editor, landscape architect Garrett Eckbo,
environmental writer T. H. Watkins, journalist Mel Wax, and an editorial
board that included Wallace Stegner, columnist Neil Morgan, architect
Nathaniel Owings, attorney Clarence Heller, and Caspar Weinberger. The
journal had a northern California tilt, dominated mostly by writers (and
issues) facing the San Francisco Bay Area and surrounding areas.[^61]
California Tomorrow believed that state intervention into urban growth
could allow regional government to act, as political scientist Stephanie
Pincetl has noted, "as a redistributive entity and actively redress
revenue and housing inequities."[^62] <!-- what else here? -->

Former Santa Clara County Planning Department director Karl Belser, who
had attempted to limit San Jose's growth into unincorporated county
lands in the 1950s, took to the pages of *Cry California* to bemoan the
state's lack of coordinated planning. The mix of federal, state, and
local agencies that "dabble in the planning business" lacked regulatory
authority resulting in "fragmented plans" without clear goals to ensure
the protection of open space and maintain quality of life.[^63] Despite
the presence of these various regulatory bodies, Belser asserted, "the
bay is being filled in, air and water are being polluted, hillsides are
being mutilated and prime cropland is being paved over."[^64]

Belser placed blame for environmental degradation onto the "economic
elite"---"landowners," "money controllers", and "mass communication
media"---who "operate in a realm of their own with little concern for
*any* but their private interests." To Besler, the *laissez-faire*
approach to land use was a symptom of the failings of postindustrial
capitalism. The public was beholden to the elite's plans, not because
they agreed with the planners but because they lacked power.[^65] Adding
to the problem of economic elites was the presence of "competitive
jealousy" among local governments who abandoned proper planning and
instead "spend sleepless nights figuring out how to throw the gig into
their neighbors."[^66] The end result from this lack of coordinated
planning resulted in "the most tragic and dangerous trend" of ignoring
the conservation of resources. "What has already happened should
certainly indicate to anyone with common sense that our state faces not
only the disfigurement of its natural beauty," Belser argued, "but also
the ruin of its primary economy."[^67] While governments bicker, "our
prime soils are being lost, our forests are being butchered, our scenic
areas are being raped, and our air and water are being polluted beyond
reclamation."[^68]

Three years later the situation had not improved, and Belser's warnings
about the lack of planning took on an even more seething tone in the
pages of *Cry California*. Pointing to the Santa Clara Valley as an
example of "slurban" development, he wrote of the "flagrant ruination"
and "irrelevant urban development of massive size and questionable
quality" that had come to dominate the valley.[^69] The environmental
problems attending such growth had become the primary concern for
Belser. Increased traffic on roadways introduced high levels of air
pollution, exacerbated by the San Francisco Bay's impenetrable inversion
layer that trapped smog in the Valley. Overdraft on underground water
supplies and the resulting subsidence threatened to ruin underground
utilities and stretch the natural limits of water availability for
cities.[^70] "Wild urban growth," he wrote, "attacked the valley much as
cancer attacks the human body."[^71]

By the late 1960s the efforts by conservationists to overcome poor land use
planning was failing. No regional restrictions on urban growth had successfully
reversed the trend of sprawl in Bay Area cities. San Jose continued to expand
rapidly, adding roughly 55,110 acres (or eighty-two square miles) to the city
between 1960 and 1970. California Tomorrow argued in 1969 in a proposed study
of Bay Area open space that

> the rapid disappearance of the orchards of the Santa Clara Valley is
> perhaps the most dramatic example of the pattern which urban
> development will take unless *permanent* measures are taken to
> preserve open spaces within the urbanized areas. It should be
> remembered that as recently as 1960, Santa Clara County was considered
> a model throughout the country in terms of progressive "greenbelt"
> ordinances to preserve agriculture.[^72]

\noindent Despite the lobbying, educational, and political efforts of
California Tomorrow, People for Open Space, and other regional
environmental organizations, open space continued shrinking and land
converted into urban space. At the state-wide level, at least, very
little action took place in protecting open spaces aside from the 1972
Coastal Protection Initiative. Not to be deterred, California Tomorrow
published the *California Tomorrow Plan* in 1971. The *California
Tomorrow Plan* proposed a comprehensive initiative to address state
infrastructure and environment. The monograph argued that there existed
a "California One" and a "California Two"---two potential paths that the
state could follow given the current problems of environmental
degradation and widespread urbanization. California One imagined a
California without any change to these policies. California One would be
unable to meet the state's energy needs, deteriorate water quality and
accessibility, continued urbanization of farmland, lose wilderness areas
and open spaces, worsen air quality, increase noise pollution, clog
roadways, cause greater housing shortages, result in underfunded and
understaffed schools, widespread unemployment especially among
minorities, fall short in recreational areas, and emphasize punitive
rather than rehabilitative treatment of criminals.[^73] To overcome
these challenges, California Tomorrow envisioned a different California
comprised of a State Planning Council to develop comprehensive policies
addressing a wide range of environmental, social, and economic issues in
the state. Under the Planning Council, California Tomorrow envisioned
ten regional governments to absorb the many single-issue agencies and
districts, drawing up regional plans regarding land use, infrastructure,
and socioeconomic issues.[^74] By devising regional plans rather than
piecemeal local decisions, California Tomorrow leaned on a belief in
good government, scientific evidence, and expert knowledge in solving
the state's urban problems.

The themes identified by Alfred Heller, Dorothy Erskine, Sam Wood, Jack
Kent, and Mel Scott were picked up by a range of intellectuals,
journalists, and observers throughout the 1960s, including William
Bronson's photojournalistic *How to Kill a Golden State* (1968),
Berkeley-trained biologist Raymond F. Dasmann's *The Destruction of
California* (1965), Dorothea Lange and Pirkle Jones' *Death of a Valley*
(1960), Richard G. Lillard's *Eden in Jeopardy* (1966), and journalist
Harold Gilliam, who served as Secretary of the Interior Stuart Udall's
assistant and published a series of books and articles in the *San
Francisco Chronicle* about the Bay Area.[^75] Collectively, the
intelligentia gave expression to a growing anxiety about unplanned,
runaway urban growth and the environmental, social, economic, and
political chaos that accompanied the lack of planning. Above all, these
writers and advocates argued for a philosophy that fused
environmentalism and regulated, regional urban development.

"Indiscriminate, Unplanned, Opportunistic, Premature Annexation and Urbanization"
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

"We were going to have a city of 60,000 people in the hills [above Palo
Alto]," Lennie Roberts recalled years after the founding of the
Committee for Green Foothills. "And a number of people got together and
decided, well, we'll be for something---we'll be for the Green
Foothills."[^76] As the political efforts of California Tomorrow and
People for Open Space accelerated, primarily in northern counties and
East Bay communities like Napa and Marin, further south on the
Midpeninsula ideas about restricting urban growth and critiquing
environmental degradation influenced local politics. The legislative
efforts of California Tomorrow and People for Open Space failed to gain
much traction at the state level by the end of the 1960s, but the
advocates of urban development for the sake of "progress" would find
their greatest challengers coming out of grassroots politics and local
action.

In Palo Alto, the Committee for Green Foothills initiated a campaign
shortly after their first fight with Stanford University to enact
policies for setting aside lands for recreation. Members of the
Committee worked closely with the county in establishing the
Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District (MROSD). In 1972, a referendum
placed Measure R onto the ballot that would establish the Open Space
District, originally focused on the northwestern portion of Santa Clara
County. Inspired by the San Francisco-based Livingston and Blayney
planning agency report in 1971 that concluded it would be cheaper for
open space to be acquired and preserved rather than infrastructure
extended into the foothills, the Committee for Green Foothills cited the
report as a means for passing the MROSD measure.[^77] Since MROSD
existed as a special district, it required no legislative intervention
by the state---only the approval of county voters.[^78]

Perhaps no place better represented the shifting philosophy of
growth-as-progress better than San Jose. Challenges to San Jose's growth
interests on the city council began to mount in the early 1960s as
homeowners in the suburban fringes of the city began opposing the city's
sprawl. In 1962, Virginia Shaffer, a Republican and the first woman to
be voted onto San Jose's city council, rose to office representing the
interests of homeowners and taxpayers.[^79] The *Mercury News* referred
to Shaffer as "Mrs. No" based on a voting record that frequently opposed
rezoning decisions. Shaffer represented the expression of new interests
guiding ideas about the city's future growth, but to call her platform
conservation would misrepresent her attitude towards urban growth.
Although her criticisms of San Jose found sympathy among
conservationists, her concerns revolved primarily around slowing growth
to ease the tax burden on homeowners and limiting government spending.
Shaffer and her homeowner constituency had grown frustrated by the
city's continual emphasis on growth without paying mind to the adequacy
of city services, high taxes, and development policies that allowed
construction on landslide-prone hillsides and floodplains.[^80] The 1962
elections rattled the pro-growth advocates in San Jose. "The election of
1962 cast a shadow that falls across our political scene even today,"
recalled former councilman and mayor George Starbird. The pro-growth
council still had an ally in Dutch Hamann, who voters retained as city
manager in 1962, but homeowners would be watching the council closely in
their decisions about zoning, recreation, taxes, and annexations.[^81]

Growth interests in San Jose continued to influence the city's sprawling
development until 1969 when antigrowth sentiment and a growing awareness
of environmentalism led voters to elect the city's first
environmentalist candidates. Hamann, sensing the shift in voter
attitude, resigned shortly after and was replaced by a new manager,
Thomas Fletcher, in 1970. Annexations declined sharply after 1970 as the
city council moved its focus instead to urban renewal projects and
in-fill of the city's existing boundaries. "The voices of the builders
and doers became lost in the many-voiced demands of the users," Starbird
lamented. "The veto was back."[^82] The end of growth-as-progress
spelled disaster for city boosters by the end of the 1960s.

San Jose was among a wave of no-growth and slow-growth regulations in
the Bay Area. Although San Jose's growth control measures never became
quite as strident as those pursued in the northern peninsula cities of
Menlo Park, Los Altos Hills, Palo Alto, and Atherton, homeowners
demanded new policies to protect their natural views and aesthetics.
Following the nation-wide trend in establishing land use controls to
slow urban growth, only a single Bay Area town had growth control laws
in 1972 but by 1975 thirty-one had established new regulations.[^83]
These regulations sought to preserve a suburban and rural character of
middle-class neighborhoods. For some municipalities on the Peninsula,
environmental protections emerged not out of genuine concern for the
environment but as a method for preserving property values or setting
down symbolic boundaries between race and class. In other towns,
environmental regulations did reflect a concern for the environment.
Whereas San Jose politics in the 1950s sought to become the "Los Angeles
of the North," in Dutch Hamann's words, the San Jose of the 1970s
jettisoned its L.A. envy. "People in San Jose want limited growth,"
future Mayor Janet Gray Hayes remarked in 1978. "They don't want another
Los Angeles."[^84] The changing contours of San Jose's green political
culture grappled with two decades of unrestrained urban growth, leading
voters to support new local regulations and support local political
leaders that made the environment a key component of their platform.

One method of growth control came in the form of zoning for residential
density. San Jose reduced residential density throughout the city from
twelve to eighteen housing units per acre to six to eight units. New
policies also required that no new development could be permitted until
developers submitted environmental impact statements that specified how
they would handle storm runoff, maintain open space, ensure the
availability of city infrastructure, and accessible schools.[^85] In
1973, San Jose voters passed Measure B that prevented new residential
development until adequate school space was provided for future
residents.[^86]

Many of these regulations, however, had the unintended affect of
offloading the costs of development and environmental regulations onto
consumers, and made low- and mid-size developments unprofitable for most
developers. In response, developers builot pricier housing affordable
only to high-income residents.[^87] Various maneuvers to build
low-income housing in Los Altos Hills, San Jose, and elsewhere in
Silicon Valley faced challenges by conservationists who complained that
such projects threatened environmental land use regulations.

Concerns about the environmental impact of the region's rapid growth
moved to the forefront of electoral politics in the early 1970s. Among
the most influential critics of sprawl was Janet Gray Hayes. A native of
Indiana who came to San Jose in 1956, Hayes involved herself in local
politics almost immediately, becoming a key member of the League of
Women Voters and president of the organization. In 1966, Governor Pat
Brown nominated Hayes to the state's Redevelopment Board and, in 1971,
she held her first political office by winning a seat on the city
council. Hayes narrowly won the 1974 mayoral race against former police
officer Bart Collins to fill a seat vacated by Norman Mineta, who voters
sent to Congress.
<!--Hayes won narrowly against Collins in a 50.6 to 49.3 percent vote.-->
Hayes was the first woman to serve as mayor of a major metropolitan
center and among a wave of female political leaders taking office in
Santa Clara County. San Jose was quickly given the distinction of
"feminist capital of the world" as female political leaders assumed
positions of power throughout city and county government.[^88] Hayes ran
on a platform of responsible growth and environmental consciousness,
epitomized by her campaign promise to "make San Jose better before we
make it bigger."

Hayes meshed well with the growing concerns of San Jose voters. Many had
become increasingly suspicious of urban growth and its synonym of
progress. In one survey, voters identified open space, urban growth, and
the environment as key challenges facing the city. Among their top
concerns, voters identified pollution, overpopulation, land use planning
and zoning, and parks and recreation as major concerns leading up to the
1974 mayoral elections.[^89] Sixty-six percent of the survey's
respondents listed protecting the environment as the top task the city
needed to take on, and fifty-nine percent felt that curbing growth and
protecting open space was necessary.[^90] Many city council members
began to distance themselves from real estate interests in the city,
identifying an association with developers as a political
liability.[^91] San Jose had become a popular symbol of poor urban
growth, lambasted by popular media, books, and studies.[^92] Residents
wanted that image---and reality---corrected.

Controlling urban growth became a feature of Valley politics stemming
from desire among homeowners to preserve their aesthetic views, one of
the very amenities that drew newcomers to suburbs throughout the Bay
Area. In 1970, City Manager Fletcher hired Rand researchers to study the
ways San Jose could curtail growth. The researchers concluded little
could be done by the city. While city leaders accommodated to the
demands of developers, the drivers of urban growth were
external---federal investments into suburban homeownership, the
decentralization of industry, and highway construction created a
situation where Santa Clara County followed similar urban trends
throughout the country.[^93] But land use regulations were popular among
homeowners because it promised protections of aesthetic vistas. The Rand
researchers noted a "growing concern for the natural environment and
continued concern for one's family environment." Many homeowners found
"their fortunes are tied, not to continued growth . . . , but to keeping
out those who would move in to change the area further and who, by
virtue of moving in, would destroy the reasons for which those who are
already in the County moved there."[^94] Whether avowed
environmentalists or not, homeowners saw the protection of their
environments as a key component of their suburban lifestyles.[^95]

Against the backdrop of skepticism towards developers and frustrations
with urban growth, the 1978 San Jose mayoral campaign centered almost
exclusively around limiting urban growth, what the *San Francisco
Chronicle* simply called "The Issue."[^96] Hayes, who had risen to
prominence on the basis of her commitment to controlling sprawl in San
Jose, was challenged by city council member Al Garza. A native of East
San Jose who worked as a school teacher and administrator, Garza was
appointed to the council to fill a seat vacated by the death of Vice
Mayor Kurt Gross in 1971. He successfully ran for reelection in 1973 and
1976. Garza took aim at Hayes' campaign promises of "better before
bigger," and took particular aim at the city's lack of attention in
providing East Side with the "services and amenities" of the rest of the
city.[^97]
<!-- how does he define growth? What does that look like? What is "growth"? -->

Debates around the two candidates positions focused on specific spaces
in the city. Hayes insisted early in the campaign that she was a limited
growth---not anti-growth---candidate, while Garza represented pro-growth
interests in the city. Hayes pointed to her support to various plans
included attracting new industry, using a policy of fill-in to build in
areas already adequately served by city services, an expansion of city
parks, and capital improvements. Garza pointed to other areas of the
city, such as Hayes' approval of a commercial development in the
Evergreen district in southeast San Jose where existing roads could not
handle the influx of traffic.[^98] Yet even the pro-growth sympathies of
the *San Jose Mercury* evaporated by the mid-1970s. The *Mercury*
editorialized in support of reelecting Hayes, arguing that her policy of
in-filling, improving the city tax base, promoting urban redevelopment,
and cutting government spending had served to control growth and take
advantage of existing city services.[^99]

A strong anti-incumbent sensibility among San Jose voters contributed to
a runoff election between Hayes and Garza after neither managed to gain
a majority vote in the June primaries. The political interest in land
use bled into other city and county campaigns, primarily the Santa Clara
County supervisor seat vacated by the retirement of Sig Sanchez. A
runoff between Susanne Wilson, a city council member, and Ivan Zubow, a
South County land developer who funded his campaign out of his own
pockets, exposed political faultlines around growth. Wilson emphasized
her record of voting record of slow growth, while Zubov charged that her
record failed to reflect her claim. Zubow argued his role as a land
developer made him more than qualified for the position.[^100]

Builders and developers were central figures in the campaign. The
Hayes-Garza race achieved prominence as the most expensive campaign
waged in San Jose's history, supported largely by developer interests
that poured money into both candidates. The Builders and Contractors
Committee, comprised of thirty members of builders, contractors,
bankers, and associated industries, pledged \$14,000 to Garza's campaign
and planned donations of \$10,000 to Councilman Joe Colla, who faced a
challenge from limited growth advocate Jerry Estruth. Bill Williams, a
member of the Committee and builder for Sea Homes, remarked that he
could "only surmise that the majority of our members felt that those two
people [Garza and Colla] are better for our industry."[^101] By the end
of the mayoral campaign, sixty percent of Garza political donations came
from developers.[^102] Hayes, Garza, Estruth, Colla, Zubow, and Wilson
all received major contributions from local developers.[^103]

![The perceived cozy relationship between pro-growth members of the San
Jose city council and developers caught the ire of
voters.](figures/garza-colla-cartoon.png)

The mayoral campaign became mired in controversy as it entered the final
three months. In a maneuver that rhymed with the Progress Committee's
firing of the city manager in the 1940s, the pro-growth contingency on
the city council sought to strike at the Hayes campaign by orchestrating
an ouster of City Manager Ted Tedesco. Tedesco assumed office in 1973
and had guided San Jose's in-fill policy. In a four-to-three vote, the
city council voted to remove Tedesco from his position. The council
members opposing Tedesco---Garza, David Runyon, a real estate developer,
Joe Colla, a drugstore owner known for being a maverick, and Larry
Pegram, the council's only Republican---overruled the votes of Hayes,
Wilson, and Jim Self. Local media quickly dubbed the pro-growth members
the "Fearsome Foursome." The opponents of Tedesco were open about their
reasoning. Garza explained that Tedesco's ouster reflected his
unwillingness to serve the will of the council majority, suggesting that
the city manager's slow-growth sensibilities had gotten in the way of
the city's operation.[^104] Joe Colla reasoned frankly: "He was
anti-growth, and this is now a pro-growth city."[^105] In the midst of
the Tedesco ouster, the Fearsome Foursome also pushed through additional
pro-growth policies including the abolishment of a city policy tying new
growth to adequate streets, adopting a \$28 million road program to
build new roads rather than improve existing infrastructure, and
approved a new tax on urban development days before Proposition 13 made
it illegal.[^106]

In November, the pro-growth outlook of the Fearsome Foursome failed to
resonate with voters. Hayes swept past Garza, who claimed over 70% of
the vote, while Colla was unseated from his council seat by Estruth, who
received 60% of the vote. Shortly after the campaigns, David Runyon was
forced to resign after a public drinking scandal and was replaced by Tom
McEnery, another limited-growth advocate.[^107] The public rejection of
Garza and the pro-growth interests in the city council reflected the
political shift happening throughout California and the West as concerns
about growth and the environment shaped the region's politics. Jubilant
victors and outside observers saw Hayes' victory as a sign that the
city's incessant drive for expansion had come to an end. Hayes saw her
victory as "a clear mandate" that San Joseans were through with the
growth-as-progress philosophy.[^108]

Just as voters helped enable urban growth through their sanction of
municipal bonds in the 1950s and 1960s coupled with their desire for
countryside living, so to did people begin to have second thoughts about
such growth. Inadequate city services, high taxes, gridlocked roads,
environmental damage, and a sense that quality of life was declining
contributed to a state of alarm and calls for reform. Voters were
motivated to action through various sentiments. Sometimes these
reflected genuine ecological concerns, arrived at through their exposure
to expert literature. Other times, responses to growth came in the form
of quality-of-life concerns and a loss of aesthetics, a concern that the
foothills of the Santa Cruz and Diablo ranges would be filled with homes
or obscured by daily smog. They frequently tied economic issues to
environmental issues. Citing the Marshall Plan, urban redevelopment, and
the moon landings, Dorothy Erskine pleaded with Michael McCloskey to
find out how "can we make environmental protection fit this pattern and
perhaps save us from war and a worse fate?"[^109] The political contests
over sprawl and growth highlighted how ecological, economic, and social
issues intertwined in postwar Santa Clara County. The cities had managed
to co-opt regional government, but in the process sparked a grassroots
protest. They enjoyed the amenities of the Peninsula, and when those
were threatened they pushed for reform.[^110]

Yet while Hayes and her supporters appeared to have achieved victory
over the growth-is-progress ideology that had dominated San Jose
politics since the 1940s---and most local politics for several
municipalities in Santa Clara County---the case for reform did not
always mean more effective government. Slow-growth interests succeeded
in slowing growth, including the San Jose city council's approval of a
1976 General Plan that was seen as a bridle on growth, development
moratoriums throughout the Peninsula, and successful efforts and
shutting down proposed residential developments.[^111] Yet local
governments remained at odds with one another. Despite maneuvers by San
Jose to preserve foothills from residential development, for example,
proposals by Santa Clara County planners sought to open up hillsides in
the Santa Cruz and Diablo mountains for residential development.
Environmentalists decried the threats of earthquakes, landslides, and
sewer systems that could threaten mountain reservoirs, yet to county
planners the decision to open up lands for construction only helped to
reduce pressure for more development.[^112] The county's plans were all
the more troubling to environmentalists following an amended 1980 county
General Plan that loosened the slope-density formula in 1982 that
restricted the number of subdivisions that could appear in a 100-acre
lot with an average slope of twenty degrees. To the editors of the *San
Jose Mercury*, county planners lacked "political will." [^113]

Developers no longer ruled the Valley's future. In November 1982,
developer Lee Brandenburg won the approval of the San Jose city council
to begin construction on a hillside development, the first such
development in the city since 1976. Brandenburg had built housing
developments throughout the South Bay in Saratoga, Los Gatos, Almaden,
Willow Glen, and West San Jose.[^114] Brandenburg saw himself adding to
San Jose's cultural and economic capital. Casting himself as an
environmentalist and lifelong member of the Nature Conservancy,
Brandenburg assured the council and critics at a public hearing that he
submitted careful studies of Urban Service Area expansion,
archaeological reports, geological and seismic investigations,
engineering analysis, and traffic analysis to ensure the development
would not become a burden upon the city or its residents. Furthermore,
Brandenburg argued, just as he had when one of his proposals came before
the city council in 1978, that such high-end developments would attract
wealthy and powerful residents, many of whom "do business in San Jose
[but] don't live there."[^115] Located north of Silver Creek in the
southeast end of the city, the Silver Creek Hills development sought to
be a resort complete with Arnold Palmer-designed golf course, resort
hotel, shops, and 2,610 luxury homes and condominiums. The League of
Women Voters and an ad hoc coalition calling themselves San Joseans for
Limited Growth filed suit against the city council, arguing that the
city failed to follow state environmental laws and, therefore, their
approval to amend the General Plan for the Brandenburg development was
illegal. Nor, they argued, could the sustainability of the planned
community be assured. Not only would Silver Creek Hills reside on
extremely steep hillsides, argued H.G. Wilshire, a member of the
Committee for Green Foothills, but construction would disturb "underlain
. . . rocks that are notoriously difficult to stabilize." The threats of
landslides and unsuitability of city services to reach the community,
Wilshire concluded, reflected "risk-taking with innocent lives" by the
city council.[^116] In the end, a county judge overruled the council's
approval. The environmentalists had won.

\thoughtbreak{Shortly after her election} as mayor, Janet Gray Hayes spoke before an
audience at the Conference on Bay Area Urban Growth held in San
Francisco. Growth management, Hayes posited, was defined by the three
"Ps"---"piecemeal, patchwork, and prop-up." Her message that day was the
role of politics and cities. "Political process can be used in a
positive way," she told the audience. "Cities can't solve urban problems
on their own. Government's can solve urban problems on their own.
Governmental policies and programs should set the stage for private
initiative and innovation. Both the public and the private sectors have
an obligation for tomorrow. We need less conflict and confrontation, and
more cooperation and coordination."[^117] By the end of the 1980s,
cities throughout the Peninsula had placed development limits into their
urban plans. Local governments responded to the demands of grassroots
activists who expected more from their political leaders. Local
opposition to boosters owed much to the new environmental regulations
and environmentalists. Plans to expand cities further into the foothills
drew attention of environmental organizations whose efforts shaped the
proposals. Yet even as environmentalists had halted new development, it
could not reverse the original land grab. Once the political ability to
confront powerful growth interests became viable, the geography of the
postindustrial space had already been set. Capital was fixed in space,
shaping suburban and industrial spaces that introduced uneven impacts on
housing and environmental risk. The consequences of that history would
become apparent in the 1980s, as the following chapter explores, when
the landscape of industry and the landscape of suburbs collided over the
pollution of space.

[^1]: Stewart Udall, *The Quiet Crisis* (New York: Holt, Reinhart and
    Winston, 1963), xvii.

[^2]: *Esquire*, 1983, 356.

[^3]: *Latin American Literary Review*, (Spring 1977): 176.

[^4]: Leonard Downie, Jr., "A Misplanned Suburb," *Washington Post*,
    December 30, 1973.

[^5]: @dasmann1965destruction, 19.

[^6]: @rome2001bulldozer. Christopher Sellers argues that Rome that such an
  analysis overlooks a genuine environmentalism emerging from the suburbs.
  @sellers2012crucible. 

[^7]: @clark1959health, 49--51, 79; *The Spanish-American Community of
    the San Francisco Bay Area* (U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, April
    28, 1967), 3.

[^8]: "Agriculture," *San Jose Mercury*, January 15, 1956.

[^9]: "East Siders form alliance to increase political clout," *San Jose
    Mercury*, March 22, 1978; @cavin2012siliconvalley, 293--294.

[^10]: See, for example, @dewey1998working.

[^11]: @castillo1995chavez, 24; @pitti2004devil, 150--154.

[^12]: Fred Ross, "The Saga of Sal Si Puedes," 3--6.

[^13]: @clark1959health, 35. Herman E.
    Gallegos, who became the first president of the San Jose CSO in
    1952, recalled three stories as to how Sal Si Puedes got its name.
    See Gallegos, "Equity and Diversity: Hispanics in the Nonprofit
    World," interview by Gabrielle Morris, 1988, 16, Regional Oral
    History Office, Bancroft Library, University of California,
    Berkeley.

[^14]: Ross, "The Saga of Sal si Puedes," 8.

[^15]: Ross, "The Saga of Sal si Puedes," 16, 22---23; @clark1959health, 28; 
    Levy, *Cesar Chavez*, 104

[^16]: San Jose City Planning Commission, *Master Plan of the City of
    San Jose*, 89.

[^17]: Planning Commission, *Master Plan of the City of San Jose*, 94--95.

[^18]: Planning Commission, *Master Plan of the City of San Jose*, 89.

[^19]: "Housing for Freeway Displace-ees,", newspaper clipping, n.d.,
    Box 5, Folder 19, Fred Ross Papers, Department of Special
    Collections, Stanford University Libraries, Stanford, California.

[^20]: "Housing for Freeway Displace-ees," Fred Ross Papers.

[^21]: Gallegos oral history, 17--18.

[^22]: @pitti2004devil, 157.

[^23]: Social Planning Council of Santa Clara County, Inc. and Santa
    Clara County Planning Department, "Profile '70: A Socio-Economic
    Data Book for Santa Clara County", (County of Santa Clara Planning Department, 1973).

[^24]: @mensinger1981losaltos, 21-22.

[^25]: @mensinger1981losaltos, 23.

[^26]: Social Planning Council of Santa Clara County, Inc. and Santa
    Clara County Planning Department, "Profile '70: A Socio-Economic
    Data Book for Santa Clara County".

[^27]: "Scatter Low-Cost Housing," *San Jose Mercury News*, September
    10, 1970.

[^28]: "Mexican Americans Sound Call for Unity," *San Jose Mercury*,
    September 17, 1969; "Thou Tells Ybarra: Get Thee Out," *San Jose
    Mercury News*, August 9, 1968; "Mexican Americans Split from THOU
    Group," *San Jose Mercury News*, August 12, 1968; "The 'U' Is
    Dropped Off THOU," *San Jose Mercury News*, August 13, 1968;
    @cavin2012siliconvalley, 515--517.)

[^29]: *San Jose Mercury*, March 11, 1972.

[^30]: *San Jose Mercury*, November 24, 1972; *San Jose Mercury*,
    November 22, 1972; *San Jose Mercury*, December 4, 1972; *San Jose
    Mercury*, November 21, 1972; "One-Acre Zoning Draws Criticism," *San
    Jose Mercury*, December 16, 1970; @cavin2012siliconvalley, 527--528.

[^31]: *San Jose Mercury*, December 21, 1970; @cavin2012siliconvalley,
    489--490.

[^32]: "Hills City Zoning Upheld by Court," *San Jose Mercury*,
    September 12, 1974; *Ybarra v. Los Altos Hills*.

[^33]: @walker2007countrycity, 133.

[^34]: @walker2007countrycity, 133.

[^35]: @walker2007countrycity, 132---133; @vieg1955two, 244---246.

[^36]: @walker2007countrycity, 133.

[^37]: @scott1959bayarea, 2.

[^38]: @scott1959bayarea, 274.

[^39]: @walker2007countrycity, 136.

[^40]: @pincetl1999transforming, 140--141.

[^41]: "Guidelines, Santa Clara County Local Agency Formation
    Commission," September 1974, Folder 7, Carton 53, California
    Tomorrow Records, MS 3641, California Historical Society;
    @walker2007countrycity, 137; @pincetl1999transforming, 141--143.

[^42]: @kent1970openspace, 69.

[^43]: @dyble2009toll, 175--176.

[^44]: Jack Kent, *City and Regional Planning for the Metropolitan San
    Francisco Bay* (Berkeley: Institute of Governmental Studies, 1963),
    1--2; quoted in @dyble2009toll, 176.

[^45]: @theissen2010erskine, 45--53.

[^46]: @theissen2010erskine, 57.

[^47]: @walker2007countrycity, 134--136; @theissen2010erskine, 117--128.

[^48]: Quoted in @walker2007countrycity, 136.

[^49]: Letter from Dorothy Erskine to Michael McCloskey, April 12, 1969,
    Folder 4, Carton 2, California Tomorrow Records MS 3641, California Historical Society; ellipses in original.

[^50]: @pincetl1999transforming, 147--148.

[^51]: "Planning for Growth", 1955, 43.

[^52]: "Planning for Growth," 45.

[^53]: "Planning for Growth," 43---44.

[^54]: California Legislature, *Joint Committee on Open Space Land,
    Preliminary Report* (Sacramento, March 1969), 10;
    @brucebiggs1975landuse; @snyder1966landuse; @walker2007countrycity,
    43. See also @brosnan2010napa, 36.

[^55]: @kent1970openspace, 74; "Ideas for Discussion with Ford
    Foundation," November 19, 1968, Folder 4, Carton 2, California
    Tomorrow Records MS 3641, California Historical Society.

[^56]: People for Open Space, "The Case for Open Space," January 1969,
    4, Folder 4, Carton 2, California Tomorrow Records, MS 3641, California Historical Society.

[^57]: People for Open Space, "The Case for Open Space," report, 7,
    Folder 4 People for Open Space, Carton 2, California Tomorrow
    Records MS 3641, California Historical Society.

[^58]: People for Open Space, "The Case for Open Space," report, 10,
    Folder 4 People for Open Space, Carton 2, California Tomorrow
    Records MS 3641, California Historical Society. See also Association of Bay
    Area Governments, *Regional Open Space Element*, Supplemental Report
    RP-3, (Berkeley, October 1969), 9--10.

[^59]: @wood1962goinggoing, 6.

[^60]: @wood1963phantom, 5; @starr2009golden, 418--419.

[^61]: @starr2009golden, 422.

[^62]: @pincetl1999transforming, 153.

[^63]: Karl Belser, "The Planning Fiasco in California," *Cry California*
    (Summer 1967), 10.

[^64]: Belser, "Planning Fiasco," *Cry California*, 11.

[^65]: Belser, "Planning Fiasco," 11.

[^66]: Belser, "Planning Fiasco," 13.

[^67]: Belser, "Planning Fiasco," 13.

[^68]: Belser, "Planning Fiasco," 13.

[^69]: Karl Belser, "The Making of Slurban America," (Fall 1970), 1.

[^70]: Belser, "The Making of Slurban America," 17.

[^71]: Belser, "The Making of Slurban America," 5.

[^72]: "Regional Open Space Study," August 1, 1968, 1, Carton 2, Folder
    4, California Tomorrow Records MS 3641, California Historical Society.

[^73]: *California Tomorrow Plan*, 24--36.

[^74]: *California Tomorrow Plan*, 46--48. See also
    @pincetl1999transforming, 161--162.

[^75]: @bronson1968golden; @dasmann1965destruction; @lange1960death;
    @lillard1966eden; @gilliam1972betterworse; @walker2007countrycity,
    133; @starr2009golden, 416--420.

[^76]: Roberts quoted in @press2002openspace, 41.

[^77]: @press2002openspace, 42; @walker2007countrycity, 164.

[^78]: California state law defines special districts as "any agency of
    the state for the local performance of governmental or proprietary
    functions within limited boundaries." For an explanation on the role
    of special district in California, see *What's So Special About
    Special Districts? A Citizen's Guide to Special District in
    California,*, 4th ed., Senate Local Government Committee, October
    2010.

[^79]: @trounstine1982movers, 77.

[^80]: "Voters Pass on Manager, 3 For Council Tuesday," *San Jose
    Mercury*, April 8, 1962; "Voters Will Decide on Council Posts," *San
    Jose Mercury*, April 10, 1962; "6 Will Vie for S.J. Council in
    Runoff!" *San Jose Mercury*, April 11, 1962; @trounstine1982movers,
    100--101; @matthews2003dreams, 191--192; @johnston1994success,
    94--95.

[^81]: @trounstine1982movers, 99--101.

[^82]: Quoted in @trounstine1982movers, 103.

[^83]: @rosen1981growth, 332--333.

[^84]: "Sweet Triumph for San Jose's Mayor," *San Francisco Chronicle*,
    November 9, 1978, Folder 13, Box 1, Hayes papers.

[^85]: Santa Clara County Planning Policy Committee, *Zoning and
    Housing* (San Jose: Santa Clara County Planning Department, 1970);
    Santa Clara County Planning Policy Committee, "Urban
    Development/Open Space Plan for Santa Clara County, 1973--1978"
    (Santa Clara County Planning Department, n.d.), Box 4, Folder 96,
    League of Women Voters, San Jose/Santa Clara Chapter Records, MSS-2006-09-01, San
    Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives;
    Social Planning Council of Santa Clara County, Inc. and Santa Clara
    County Planning Department, "Profile '70: A Socio-Economic Data Book
    for Santa Clara County"; San Jose City Planning Commission, Master
    Plan of the City of San Jose; San Jose City Planning Commission,
    *1981 Annual Review: The General Plan, List of Potential Land
    Use/Transportation Diagram and Text Amendments*; "General Plan
    Amendment Report, 1981 Annual Review, Text Amendments, Number 139",
    1981, Box 3, Folder 50, League of Women Voters, MSS-2006-09-01, San Jose/Santa Clara
    Chapter Records, San Jose State University Library Special
    Collections and Archives; San Jose City Planning Commission,
    *Conforming Zoning Ordinance and Management Task Force Report* (San
    Jose: City of San Jose, July 16, 1981), Box 4, Folder 94, League of
    Women Voters, San Jose/Santa Clara Chapter Records, MSS-2006-09-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives.

[^86]: @rosen1981growth, 332--333.

[^87]: @rosen1981growth, 328--331.

[^88]: "But She Picks Political Ring," *San Jose Mercury News*, June 13,
    1971, Folder 10, Box 1, Janet Hayes Papers, SJSU; "San Jose's First
    Lady, The Mayor," *San Jose Mercury*, ca. 1974, Folder 12, Box 1,
    Janet Hayes Papers, SJSU; "City Council Race," *San Jose Mercury*,
    March 3, 1974, Folder 12, Box 1, Hayes Papers, SJSU;
    @flammang1985feminist; @matthews2003dreams, 191--195.

[^89]: Diridon Research Corporation, "A Survey of Voter Attitudes in the
    City of San Jos√©," August 26, 1974, 13, 16, Folder 20, Box 1, Janet
    Gray Hayes Papers, MSS-2002-01, San Jose State University Library
    Special Collections and Archives.

[^90]: "Survey of Voter Attitudes," 1--2, 1974, Folder 20, Box 1, Janet Gray Hayes Papers, MSS-2002-01, San Jose State University.

[^91]: "Forerunner," March 1973, Folder 405, Box 88, Don Edwards
    Congressional Papers, MSS-1995-01, San Jose State University Library
    Special Collections and Archives.

[^92]: Stanford Environmental Law Review, *San Jose: Sprawling City; A
    Study of the Causes and Effects of Urban Sprawl in San Jose,
    California*, March 1971; @nader1973land; "Correcting San Jose's
    Boomtime Mistake," *Businessweek*, September 19, 1970; "Boom Town,"
    *Newsweek*, September 14, 1970.

[^93]: Alesch, *Local Government's Ability to Manage Growth in a
    Metropolitan Context*, 10, 15, 18, 49; Alesch, *Growth in San Jose*,
    viii; @cavin2012siliconvalley, 500.

[^94]: Alesch, "Managing Growth," 29.

[^95]: Alesch, "Managing Growth," 45; @frieden1979regulation, 15--27;
    @frieden1979hustle; @cavin2012siliconvalley, 501--502.

[^96]: "A Tough Race for Mayor of Sprawling San Jose," *San Francisco
    Chronicle*, October 14, 1978, Folder 13, Box 1, Janet Gray Hayes Papers, MSS-2002-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives.

[^97]: "Garza berates mayor in bid to unseat her," *San Jose Mercury*,
    March 6, 1978, Folder 13, Box 1, Janet Gray Hayes Papers, MSS-2002-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives; "Garza on
    attack in mayor debate," *San Jose Mercury*, April 27, 1978, Box 13,
    Folder 1, Janet Gray Hayes Papers, MSS-2002-01, San Jose State University Special Collections and Archives; "The Politics of Growth in San Jose,"
    *California Journal*, October 1978, Folder 13, Box 1, Janet Gray Hayes Papers, MSS-2002-01, San Jose State University Special Collections and Archives.

[^98]: "Garza on attack in mayor debate," *San Jose Mercury*, April 27,
    1978, Box 13, Folder 1, Janet Gray Hayes Papers, MSS-2002-01, San Jose State University Special Collections and Archives; "Difference is 'clear,'
    says mayor of rival," *San Jose Mercury*, May 12, 1978, Folder 13,
    Box 1, Janet Gray Hayes Papers, San Jose State University Special Collections and Archives; "Five in crowded mayor's race; Hayes,
    Garza emerge as favorites," *San Jose Mercury*, May 24, 1978, Folder
    13, Box 1, Janet Gray Hayes Papers, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives.

[^99]: "Re-elect Mayor Hayes," *San Jose Mercury*, May 22, 1978, Folder
    13, Box 1, Janet Gray Hayes Papers, MSS-2002-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives.

[^100]: "Supervisor runoff to focus on land use," *San Jose Mercury*
    June 8, 1978, Folder 13, Box 1, Janety Gray Hayes Papers, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives.

[^101]: "Builders giving Garza, Colla \$24,000," *San Jose Mercury*,
    October 13, 1978, Folder 13, Box 1, Janet Gray Hayes Papers, MSS-2002-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives.

[^102]: "San Jose's future growth main issue in campaign," *San Jose
    Mercury*, November 3, 1978.

[^103]: "Finding money the key play in the campaign game," *San Jose
    Mercury*, October 8, 1978, Folder 13, Box 1, Janet Gray Hayes Papers, MS-2002-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives.

[^104]: "Challenger Al Garza," *San Jose Mercury*, October 31, 1978,
    Folder 13, Box 1, Janet Gray Hayes Papers, MSS-2002-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives.

[^105]: "The Politics of Growth in San Jose," *California Journal*,
    October 1978, Folder 13, Box 1, Janet Gray Hayes Papers, MSS-2002-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives.

[^106]: "It's a single issue race," *San Jose Sun*, October 24, 1978,
    Folder 13, Box 1, Hayes Papers; "A Tough Race for Mayor of Sprawling
    San Jose," *San Francisco Chronicle*, October 14, 1978, Folder 13,
    Box 1, Janet Gray Hayes Papers, MSS-2002-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives; letter from Susan Hammer, et al., to Friends,
    n.d., Folder 13a, Box 1, Janet Gray Hayes Papers, MSS-2002-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives.

[^107]: "Sweet Triumph for San Jose's Mayor," *San Francisco Chronicle*,
    November 9, 1978, Folder 13, Box 1, Janet Gray Hayes Papers, MSS-2002-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives.

[^108]: "Sweet Triumph for San Jose's Mayor," *San Francisco Chronicle*,
    November 9, 1978, Folder 13, Box 1, Janet Gray Hayes Papers, MSS-2002-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives.

[^109]: Letter from Erskine to to McCloskey, 2, April 12, 1969,
    California Tomorrow Papers, California Historical Society.

[^110]: "Anti-Sprawl Initiative: The Citizen's Initiative for Organized
    Growth and Fiscal Responsibility, An Initiative Ordinance,"
    petition, 1978, Folder 115, Box 4, League of Women Voters, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives.

[^111]: "Rancho San Jose Loses in City Vote," *San Jose Mercury*, January 18,
  1978, Folder 115, Box 4, League of Women Voters, MSS-2006-09-01, San Jose
  State University Library Special Collections and Archives; letter from Lennie
  Roberts to LAFCO Commissioners, May 1, 1979, Folder 115, Box 4, League of
  Women Voters, MSS-2006-09-01, San Jose State University Library Special
  Collections and Archives; "Development Moratorium of West S.J. Considered,"
  *San Jose Mercury*, August 18, 1978, Folder 115, Box 4, League of Women
  Voters, MSS-2006-09-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections
  and Archives; *League of Women Voters of San Jose/Santa Clara, Inc., v. San
  Jose City Council*, Superior Court of California, December 21, 1981,
  League of Women Voters Papers, MSS-2006-09-01, San Jose State University
  Library Special Collections and Archives.

[^112]: "Increased Density in Hills Urged," *San Jose Mercury*, n.d., Folder
  96, Box 4, League of Women Voters, MSS-2006-09-01, San Jose State University
  Library Special Collections and Archives.

[^113]: "Keep Hillsides Deal," *San Jose Mercury News*, October 24, 1984,
  Folder 96, Box 4, League of Women Voters, MSS-2006-09-01, San Jose State
  University Library Special Collections and Archives.

[^114]: "Partial Transcript of Public Hearing on 1981 General Plan Amendments,"
  November 19, 1981, 1 of 4, 15, Folder 50, Box 3, League of Women Voters,
  MSS-2006-09-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and
  Archives.

[^115]: "Partial Transcript of Public Hearing on 1981 General Plan
    Amendments," November 19, 1981, 3 of 4, 10, Folder 50, Box 3, League of Women Voters, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives.

[^116]: "Safety first," n.d., no source, news clipping, Folder 49, Box
    3, League of Women Voters, MSS-2006-09-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives. See also *League of Women Voters of
    San Jose/Santa Clara, Inc., and San Joseans for Limited Growth v.
    San Jose City Council*, December 21, 1981, Folder 49, Box 3,
    League of Women Voters, MSS-2006-09-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives; "Needed: An Environmental Impact Report," n.d., no
    source, news clipping, Folder 49, Box 3, League of Women Voters, MSS-2006-09-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives;
    "Luxury homes, public hearings," *San Jose Mercury News*, September
    9, 1982, Folder 49, Box 3, League of Women Voters, MSS-2006-09-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives; "Hillside
    Developer Asks Dismissal of Suit," *San Jose Mercury News*, April
    20, 1982, Folder 49, Box 3, League of Women Voters, MSS-2006-09-01, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives; "Partial Transcript of Public
    Hearing on 1981 General Plan Amendments," November 19, 1981, 3 of 4,
    10, Folder 50, Box 3, League of Women Voters, San Jose State University Library Special Collections and Archives.

[^117]: "Presentation by Mayor Janet Gray Hayes, City of San Jose,
    California, to the Conference on Bay Area Urban Growth: Yes or No?
    Up or Out? A Conference on Revitalizing Bay Area Cities," November
    1, 1975, 9 and 15, San Francisco Hotel, San Francisco, California,
    Folder 16, Carton 19, California Tomorrow Records, California Historical Society.

