---
author: - Jason A. Heppler
title: |
 | Chapter 4
 | A Place for Nature
...

> We stand today poised on a pinnacle of wealth and power, yet we live 
> in a land of vanishing beauty, of increasing ugliness, of shrinking 
> open space and of an overall environment that is diminished daily by 
> pollution and noise and blight. This, in brief, is the quiet 
> conservation crisis.
>
> ---Stewart Udall, *The Quiet Crisis*, 1965^[citation needed]

> From the work bays of the light-industry sheds that the speculators 
> were beginning to build in the valley, you could look out and see the 
> raggedy little apricot trees they had never bothered to bulldoze after 
> they bought the land from the farmers.
>
> ---Tom Wolfe, 1983^[*Esquire*, 1983, 356.]

> The "Fruit Bowl of America," fertile Santa Clara Valley, has come of 
> age. Suburbs, shopping centers, freeways and industrial parks are 
> marching through the orchards that until recently produced half the 
> world's prunes and a bounty of apricots, cherries and walnuts.
>
> ---"Living in Santa Clara County," Bank of America^[citation needed]

> Across the street -- the freeway,  
> blind worm, wrapping the valley up  
> from Los Altos to Sal Si Puedes.  
> I watched it from my porch >  
> unwinding. Every day at dusk  
> as Grandma watered geraniums > the  
> shadow of the freeway > lengthened.  
>
> --- "Beneath the Shadow of the Freeway," Lorna Dee Cervantes^[*Latin American Literary Review*, (Spring 1977): 176.]

<!-- Various voices of anti-growth - a combination of political actors -- those in established power and those without -- contributed to the rising environmentalism of the Bay Area. -->

Journalist Leonard Downie could scarcely find nature in Santa Clara 
County. Visiting San Jose in the early 1970s, he concluded that the only 
remaining open space existed along the "carefully tended and regularly 
watered greenery along the shoulders of the county's many freeways." The 
Santa Clara Valley had become defined by the clusters of poorly-built 
and quickly constructed homes, traffic that had given the air a 
"mustard-colored haze," and urban space so compact that there existed no 
"open spaces, parks or even sidewalks." Downie blamed poor planning and 
greed for the valley's urban problems, citing a study that found 
residential density could be maintained near 1973 levels in just thirty 
square miles that could have saved miles of open space and orchards. 
Santa Clara County, Downie concluded, had become a "jigsaw puzzle of 
intertwined suburbs" and the land "systematically ravaged" by 
"speculators, developers, other entrepreneurs and homebuyers."^[Leonard 
Downie, Jr., "A Misplanned Suburb," *Washington Post*, December 30, 
1973.] Downie was not alone in questioning the value of urban growth at 
the expense of disappearing open space. After a decade-long boom that 
saw Bay Area cities sprawl throughout the San Francisco Peninsula, 
activists began promoting the protection of open space open space for 
recreation, aesthetics, and health. All along the Peninsula, advocates 
argued for new restrictions on city growth and the protection of 
greenbelts, public parks, and wilderness areas. "Already we have filled 
the San Francisco basin with housing, industry, airfields, and highways, 
from the tops of the hills to the edge of the water," wrote Raymond 
Dasmann, a Berkeley-trained biologist. If the process proceeded, Dasmann 
feared a "gigantic, disorganized metropolis" "engulfing farm and forest, 
marsh and pasture with no end in sight."^[Dasmann, *The Destruction of 
California*, 19.]

This chapter traces the chronological contours of open space debates in 
Silicon Valley. Debates over open space in Santa Clara Valley roughly 
followed three branches. The first emerged among expert urban planners 
and residential activists, who relied on professionals to form a 
critique of poor urban planning and the loss of natural landscapes. In 
the process, they began crafting new zoning restrictions that required 
environmental impact studies and land-use regulations. The second came 
from anti-growth and no-growth advocates who urged tightened 
restrictions on the places that cities were allowed to expand. 
Simultaneously, elite suburbanites were challenged by communities forced 
to the margins of the suburbs---Chicanos, African Americans, Asian 
Americans---who formed their own critique of conservation at once apart 
and in conflict with California's mainstream environmental 
organizations. Finally, another branch of activists focused their 
argument around issues of recreation and the "best use" for land. 
Together, these activists shared a common language---using terms such as 
"beauty," "wilderness," "ecology"---but used that vocabulary to defend 
and define different goals. Environmental advocates revealed a clash 
between competing political ideas and urban priorities, and the very 
definition of "nature" sat at the middle of the conflict.

\thoughtbreak{The professionalization of environmentalism} began 
emerging by the late 1950s among a group of urban planners coming out of 
the University of California-Berkeley. They thought of the environment 
differently. Whereas the neighborhood activists defined their concerns 
around specific local concerns, the new wave of environmentalists urged 
policymakers and cities to think more regionally.

<!-- what does some text analysis of the gov docs say? -->

## Threat of Deindustrialization

Environmental activists made a point to suggest that sprawl, loss of 
open space, smog, traffic, and other concerns would lead to industries 
deciding to relocate elsewhere. If boosters were wont to point to 
climate, space, and the landscape as a benefit for industry and its 
employees, environmentalists were quick to point out that threatening 
those benefits also meant industry would be less likely to come to the 
Bay Area. Business and cultural institutions that had come to the Bay 
Area because of its quality of life reputation, argued People for Open 
Space, "are here because of the quality of the physical environment. The 
Bay, the rolling hills, the wooded ridges, the beaches, the orchards and 
vineyards---all combine to provide an unmatched setting."^[People for 
Open Space, "The Case for Open Space," report (January 1969), Folder 4, 
Carton 2, Calif. Tomorrow records {DETAIL}.]

Like many postwar environmental critics, Santa Clara County 
conservationists argued for the importance of farmland and the loss of 
the country's ability to produce food if prime soils were paved over for 
subdivisions and industrial parks.

<!--## East Side Environment-->

\thoughtbreak{Among the communities giving voice to environmental} 
concerns was the Mexican American community in East San Jose. In the 
early 1950s the Mayfair district in San Jose became the epicenter of 
Latino activism that, among their demands for halting racial 
discrimination, calls for greater participation in electoral politics, 
and labor rights, included a critique of San Jose's growth policies and 
its environmental consequences.

Originally a neighborhood populated predominantly by Puerto Rican farm 
laborers, Latinos living in Sal Si Puedes moved to the neighborhood in 
greater numbers the 1940s to work in the orchards, packing houses, and 
on construction crews building San Jose's suburban 
future.^[@clark1959health, 49--51, 79; *The Spanish-American Community 
of the San Francisco Bay Area* (U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, April 
28, 1967), 3.] In 1950, the Barron-Gray Packing Company opened a large 
facility in San Jose that employed 3,000 workers.^["Nearly 3000 Will Be 
Working Soon on Colorful Pack," *San Jose Mercury News*, August 3, 
1950.] In the early 1950s, agriculture remained a steadily profitable 
industry. By the mid-1950s, the county boasted the highest levels of 
agricultural profits before agricultural industries began their steady 
decline towards the end of the decade. "Agriculture and industry are 
synonymous words in the Santa Clara Valley," the *San Jose Mercury* 
could boast in 1955. Food processing employed a third of the county's 
manufacturing workforce.^["Agriculture," *San Jose Mercury*, January 15, 
1956.] The presence of San Jose's agricultural industry attracted many 
migrants seeking job opportunities.

East Side reflected the spatial influences of industrialization in the 
Bay Area. Industries tended to cluster west and south in San Jose, 
staying close to the highways that channeled traffic and freight north 
and south on the Peninsula. Zoning decisions by city and county 
government likewise determined the spatial layout of industrialization 
throughout the county. Few of the Bay Area's new high-tech industries 
located themselves in the eastern parts of San Jose. Because of this, 
East Side's orchards tended to persist longer than other areas of San 
Jose. Likewise, laborers in the orchards and packing houses tended to 
locate near the industries in which they were employed. <!-- do I have 
sources to back this up? -->

Among those coming to East Side in the 1950s was Cesar Chavez. Chavez, 
his wife, and four kids moved to San Jose in 1952, where he found 
irregular work in canneries and orchards. A native of Yuma, Arizona, 
Chavez's family moved to Los Angeles when he was ten years old and then 
San Jose, where his family worked in fruit packing houses. After a stint 
in the Navy during World War II, Chavez married and moved to foothills 
of San Jose where they sharecropped for a few years. Unable to scrape 
together much of a living, they moved into the city where Chavez worked 
in harvesting crops and lumberyards.

The pattern and policies of the Bay Area's postwar development 
introduced uneven environmental effects to barrio neighborhoods. Space, 
race, class, and environmental politics became tangled in Sal Si Puedes, 
expressed through Chavez and other Latino activists in the South Bay. 
Historians have noted the connection between organized labor and its 
connections to environmentalism, in particular the maneuvers of the 
United Farm Workers and Chavez to point out the dangers of working with 
pesticides.^[See, for example, @dewey1998working.] Few historians have 
looked at how that environmentalism traced itself, in part, to the 
communities in which workers lived.

Chavez hosted the first Community Services Organization (CSO) meeting in 
San Jose in 1952. Chavez lived in the neighborhood known as Sal Si 
Puedes ("Get out if you can"), a suburban barrio in East San Jose that 
served as home for many of the area's seasonal workers. Sal Si Puedes 
was overlooked by the city. The majority of the concerns at the first 
CSO meeting revolved around environmental issues: floods, polluted 
creeks cesspools that spread dysentery.^[Cesar Chavez, "The Organizer's 
Tale," *Ramparts*, July 1966; Levy, *Cesar Chavez*, 97--98; Ross, 
*Conquering Goliath* 3; Ross, "The Saga of Sal Si Puedes" 5.] The CSO 
became an expression of political power for barrio residents concerned 
about urban growth and its attendant problems. The urban transformations 
in East San Jose led to a new kind of environmental politics among 
barrio residents that engaged in electoral politics and led to 
widespread<!--really?--> discussions about urban growth and its 
attendant environmental costs for the suburban *colonia*.

Located in the Mayfair district east of Highway 101, Sal Si Puedes 
occupied the very eastern edge of the neighborhood.^[Sal Si Puedes no 
longer exists today. The original site of Sal Si Puedes is now overlaid 
by Highway 680. The interchange between Highway 680 and Highways 101/280 
was completed in the 1970s.] Sal Si Puedes had become a site of 
environmental concern for the city's Mexican American residents. By the 
early 1950s, Fred Ross wrote of the area's lack of sewers, the presence 
of cesspools that led to amoebic dysentery outbreaks, and flooding, 
muddy streets that occasionally left children unable to attend 
school.^[Ross, "The Saga of Sal Si Puedes," 3--6.] In the 1950s the 
residents of Sal Si Puedes criticized the environmental hazards that had 
overtaken their community, using environmental concerns to form a 
critique of the city's public policies that overlooked its minority 
communities. In the first meeting of the CSO, residents took the 
opportunity to denounce "every rate, mosquito, cesspool, traffic hazard 
and flooded road" that had come to characterize the city.^[Ross, "The 
Saga of Sal si Puedes," {PG}.] Even the very name of the community 
became a rallying point for activists. Originally coined "Sal Si Puedes" 
by Puerto Rican families who gave it the name due to its muddy streets 
that became filled with potholes in the winter rains. Residents 
continued to use the name because of its housing and socioeconomic 
problems.^[Clark, *Health in Mexican American Culture*, 35. Herman E. 
Gallegos, who became the first president of the San Jose CSO in 1952, 
recalled three stories as to how Sal Si Puedes got its name. See 
Gallegos, "Equity and Diversity: Hispanics in the Nonprofit World," 
interview by Gabrielle Morris, 1988, 16, Regional Oral History Office, 
Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley.]

San Jose dictated the paths of urban development through its public 
works projects. <!-- find the sewer system map; it's on the home office 
desk -- is Sal Si Puedes not connected? -->

<!-- "San Jose's Barrio," San Jose Mercury, March 30, 1978. -->

Ross, Chavez, and others began organizing the community to act, turning 
to electoral politics to get the city's attention. The concerns of the 
activists were generally focused on anti-poverty, ending racial 
discrimination, and embracing the postwar welfare state. But their 
platform was framed, in part, around environmental concerns. Ross told 
members of the CSO meeting that election drives he helped organize in 
Los Angeles had helped bring streetlights, paved roads, and medical care 
to the barrio. East San Jose could achieve the same.^[Ross, "The Saga of 
Sal si Puedes," {PG}.] An 85-day registration drive managed to register 
6,000 Mexican American voters. The move caught the attention of city 
officials, who responded by bringing modern urban services to Sal Si 
Puedes within months after the election drive. New public works systems 
to fix chronic flooding, clearing out cesspools, and paved roads were 
brought to the barrio. Packinghouses and canneries were forced to cease 
dumping effluence into creeks.^[Ross, "The Saga of Sal si Puedes," 16; 
Clark, *Health in the Mexican American Culture*, 28.]

<!-- figure from Ross papers on new construction -->

![Children playing near a culvert at South 33rd Street in the Mayfair District, ca. 1950s. Fred Ross Papers, Stanford University.](figures/children_mayfair.png)

Yet despite the city's attempts to connect the barrios to urban 
services, such places were still considered expendable. The City of San 
Jose saw the barrios as signs of decay. "Each segment of the city," the 
1958 master plan noted, "has a natural cycle of growth---obsolescence 
and decay---and then renewal."^[San Jose City Planning Commission, 
*Master Plan of the City of San Jose*, 89.] The planning commission's 
map of blighted areas closely followed the city's barrios. The city, the 
commission warned, needed to pursue renewal programs to prevent blight 
from spreading so "that the vast private investment in our city will 
remain sound an continue to expand."^[Planning Commission, *Master 
Plan*, 94--95.] Renewal needed to "clear and rebuild areas that 
economically are not worth saving."^[Planning Commission, *Master Plan 
of the City of San Jose*, 89.] The suggestions for renewal aligned with 
the federal transportation program, which city officials turned to for 
helping in aiding demolition of blighted areas. Municipal planners began 
planning three interstate highways and an expressway through East Side. 
The planned Highways 280 and 680 would shuffle traffic between northern 
and southern Santa Clara County. Capitol Expressway skirted the eastern 
edge of the city, allowing traffic to flow east and west. In the process 
of constructing the new highway system, many of the East Side barrios 
were demolished.^["Housing for Freeway Displace-ees," n.d., Box 5, 
Folder 19, Fred Ross Papers, Department of Special Collections, Stanford 
University Libraries, Stanford, California.] As a response, Mexican 
Americans relocated to a centralized barrio in East Side and remained 
physically and symbolically separated from white communities by the 
freeway. The eastern edge of the city also became home to many of the 
city's federally-financed public housing projects administered through 
San Jose's Housing Authority, established in 1966.^["Housing for Freeway 
Displace-ees," Fred Ross Papers.]

![Areas identified as "blight" in San Jose. San Jose Planning Commission, *Master Plan of the City of San Jose* (1958).](figures/blight_sj.png)

The barrio changed remarkably by the end of the 1960s. What had once 
housed a community of 422 people, Sal Si Puedes effectively ceased to 
exist when Highway 680 was built on top of the neighborhood. San Jose's 
policies of transportation, urban renewal, and annexations overwhelmed 
the CSO activists. "What use to be a very small neighborhood is now . . 
. hundreds of hastily-built tract homes that have become quite 
blighted," Gallegos told an interviewer. San Jose's growth "happened so 
rapidly," he continued, "[that] it was just incredible." The problems of 
Sal Si Puedes "were exacerbated by the sudden growth."^[Gallegos oral 
history, 17--18.]

But what were the environmental consequences of blight? And it's 
eradication under public policies? Urban historian Colin Gordon has 
noted the tendency of cities to define blight and urban renewal in order 
to support greater concentrations of commercialization and 
industrialization.^[@gordon2008stlouis, {PG}.]

By framing community problems around environmental issues, Mexican 
Americans in East Side shaped a conversation about their lack of access 
to the suburban lifestyle enjoyed by the majority of white residents in 
the city, but also demanded that the city ensure an environment that 
promoted health and quality-of-life. The conditions of the barrio went 
hand-in-hand with the environment, a point that residents of Sal Si 
Puedes understood well. In shaping their political organizing around the 
community, Sal Si Puedes activists argued for a suburban vision that 
included them while promoting an environmental critique of San Jose's 
sprawl. Rather than couching their arguments in appeals to whiteness, 
Mexican American activists argued for a vision that simply included the 
same rights and privileges enjoyed by others in the 
city.^[@pitti2004devil, 157.]

\thoughtbreak{The battle over blight, race, and environment would} 
emerge further north on the Peninsula as well in the town of Los Altos 
Hills. The town incorporated in 1956 as an exclusively residential town 
and implemented some of the strictest zoning requirements in the Bay 
Area. Los Altos Hills residential zoning required a minimum of one acre 
lot sizes.^[Social Planning Council of Santa Clara County, Inc. and 
Santa Clara County Planning Department, "Profile '70: A Socio-Economic 
Data Book for Santa Clara County", ({DETAIL}, 1973).]

To Jack Ybarra, president of La Confederacion de la Raza Unida (CRU) 
representing the 20,000 Mexican

While special zoning allowed affluent communities to maintain their 
status of suburban privileges, they also reflected an environmental 
consciousness but at the cost to poor communities.

Landscape aesthetics again formed the core justification for restrictive 
zoning.

<!--## Saving Open Space for the Cost of Wine and Bread-->

\thoughtbreak{Concerns about the increasing value of agricultural land} and threat of 
urban sprawl led the state legislature to act. The California 
Legislature passed the Land Conservation Act in 1965. Known as the 
Williamson Act, the state legislation ostensibly provided protections 
for open space and greenbelts. Under the Williamson Act, agricultural 
land had the option to be removed from markets by entering into a 
contract with county governments that restricted the land's use to 
agricultural uses for a minimum of ten years. In return, farmers enjoyed 
a tax benefit. County assessors valued the land at agricultural value 
rather than market value, allowing farmers to pay lower taxes on their 
land and, both parties hoped, allowed the land to remain agricultural 
perennially. Contracts were renewed annually unless notice for 
nonrenewal was given. An amendment to the Williamson Act in {YEAR} 
provided additional incentive to property owners by requiring value 
assessments at least twenty-five percent. By 1969, twenty-three counties 
in California placed more than two million acres of private land into 
the agricultural preserve.^[California Legislature, *Joint Committee on 
Open Space Land, Preliminary Report* (Sacramento, March 1969), 10; 
@brucebiggs1975landuse, 1--13; @snyder1966landuse, 1306--1313; 
@walker2007countrycity, 43. See also @brosnan2010napa, 36.]

Despite the availability of state law to control land use, the law fell 
short of its intended goals in Santa Clara County. Farmers, after all, 
still had the voluntary option of selling their land at some point in 
the future. The Williamson Act contained the potential for perpetual 
agricultural reserves under its renewable ten-year contracts, but in 
reality farmers often bowed to market pressures. Faced with shrinking 
agricultural land, citizens began seeking alternative and long-term 
methods for sustaining the presence of open space throughout the 
Peninsula. Community organizing continued to shape the local policies 
guiding land use with an increasing focus on recreation and public 
lands. An alliance of residents calling themselves Citizens for Regional 
Recreation and Parks (CRRP) formed in June 1958 with the intent to 
pressure regional government to consider the issue of public open 
spaces. Made up of conservationists, planning officials, and university 
professors, CRRP began building networks among their membership to share 
information, develop a policy on regional conservation, and support 
educational programs.^[@kent1970openspace, 69.] In 1968, the 
organization filed for nonprofit, tax-exempt status and renamed 
themselves People for Open Space (POS). Their new status as nonprofit 
allowed them to pursue a \$59,000 Ford Foundation grant to examine the 
economic impact of open space in the Bay Area.^[@kent1970openspace, 74; 
"Ideas for Discussion with Ford Foundation," November 19, 1968, Folder 
4, Carton 2, California Tomorrow Records, California Historical 
Society.] Completed in 1969 and published as both a main report and as a 
summary pamphlet, POS laid out a vision for Peninsula open space that 
fulfilled their desire to guide places against urban expansion.

People for Open Space applauded the Williamson Act, but remained 
skeptical about its implementation. Finding that "very little high 
quality agricultural land has been conserved" and concerned about the 
lack of a "guarantee of permanence," they conclude that the voluntary 
contracts are ultimately an unsatisfactory solution to open space 
preservation.^[People for Open Space, "The Case for Open Space," report, 
7, Folder 4 People for Open Space, Carton 2, California Tomorrow 
Records, California Historical Society.] A more desirable action was for 
a regional governmental body to purchase all available open space for 
preservation. Such a plan, they argued, would hardly place a financial 
burden onto Bay Area residents. In assessing the costs of such a program 
that factored in land value and the offsetting of expenses that would 
come from providing urban services to densely-populated areas versus 
sprawling cities, People for Open Space estimated that the net costs for 
each person in the Bay Area would amount to only \$2 to \$3 dollars per 
year---"about the cost of a good bottle of California wine and a loaf of 
sourdough French bread."^[People for Open Space, "The Case for Open 
Space," report, 10, Folder 4 People for Open Space, Carton 2, California 
Tomorrow Records, California Historical Society. See also Association of 
Bay Area Governments, *Regional Open Space Element*, Supplemental Report 
RP-3, (Berkeley, October 1969), 9--10.]

POS remained active in open space protections throughout the 1970s, 
pioneering the establishment of the Mid-Peninsula Open Space District in 
1972 as well as various conservation programs that protected the Suisan 
Marsh, agricultural preserves in Napa Valley, and the conservation of 
Angel Island State Park.

<!-- Open space advocates

Dorothy Erskine
 - Establishes the Citizens for Regional Recreation and Parks in 1958 with Jack Kent and Barbara Eastman and reaches out to the Sierra Club, Marin Conservation League, and other conservationists in the Bay Area.
 - Mostly comprised of citizen volunteers (mostly women) and professionals (mostly men), according to Walker p. 135.
 - The group emerged out of conversations about outdoor recreation, in the wake of Congress creating the Outdoor Recreation Resources Commission in 1958. CRRP becomes People for Open Space in 1968
 - Wins a Ford Foundation grant in to study open space, and generates two studies that triggered national debates about sprawl. California Tomorrow
 - Greenbelt Action Network (1970s) -->

## Sprawl Brawl

San Jose's drive for growth began to slow in the early 1960s as 
homeowners in the suburban fringes of the city began opposing growth 
interests. In 1962, voters elected the first candidate to oppose growth 
in the city. Virginia Shaffer was a Republican from {DETAIL} who rose to 
office representing the interests of homeowners, including being the 
only city council member opposing consolidation with Alviso. But new 
interests were starting to guide ideas about the city's future.

By 1970, the brakes were firmly pressed. Although San Jose's growth 
control measures never became quite as strident as those pursued in the 
northern peninsula cities of Menlo Park, Palo Alto, and Atherton, 
homeowners began demanding new policies to protect their natural views. 
Following the nation-wide trend in establishing land use controls to 
slow urban growth, only a single Bay Area town had growth control laws 
in 1972 but by 1975 thirty-one had established new regulations.

San Jose followed the trend. One method of growth control came in the 
form of zoning for residential density. The City reduced residential 
density throughout the city from twelve to eighteen housing units per 
acre to six to eight units. New policies also required that no new 
development could be permitted until developers submitted environmental 
impact statements that specified how they would handle storm runoff, 
maintain open space, ensure the availability of city infrastructure, and 
accessible schools.^[Santa Clara County Planning Policy Committee, 
*Zoning and Housing* (San Jose: Santa Clara County Planning Department, 
1970); Santa Clara County Planning Policy Committee, "Urban 
Development/Open Space Plan for Santa Clara County, 1973-1978" (Santa 
Clara County Planning Department, n.d.), Box 4, Folder 96, League of 
Women Voters, San Jose/Santa Clara Chapter Records, San Jose State 
University Library Special Collections and Archives; Social Planning 
Council of Santa Clara County, Inc. and Santa Clara County Planning 
Department, "Profile '70: A Socio-Economic Data Book for Santa Clara 
County"; San Jose City Planning Commission, Master Plan of the City of 
San Jose; San Jose City Planning Commission, *1981 Annual Review: The 
General Plan, List of Potential Land Use/Transportation Diagram and Text 
Amendments*; "General Plan Amendment Report, 1981 Annual Review, Text 
Amendments, Number 139", 1981, Box 3, Folder 50, League of Women Voters, 
San Jose/Santa Clara Chapter Records, San Jose State University Library 
Special Collections and Archives; San Jose City Planning Commission, 
*Conforming Zoning Ordinance and Management Task Force Report* (San 
Jose: City of San Jose, July 16, 1981), Box 4, Folder 94, League of 
Women Voters, San Jose/Santa Clara Chapter Records, San Jose State 
University Library Special Collections and Archives.]. In 1973, San Jose 
voters passed Measure B that prevented new residential development until 
adequate school space was provided for future residents.^[Kenneth T. 
Rosen and Lawrence F. Katz, "Growth Management and Land Use Controls: 
The San Francisco Bay Area Experience," *Real Estate Economics* 9, no. 4 
(December 1981): 332--333.]

Many of these regulations, however, had the unintended affect of 
offloading the costs of development to consumers and made low- and 
mid-size developments unprofitable. In response, developers began 
building pricier housing that could only be purchased by high-income 
residents.^[Rosen and Katz, "Growth Management and Land Use Controls: 
The San Francisco Bay Area Experience," 328-331.] Various maneuvers to 
build low-income housing in Los Altos Hills, San Jose, and elsewhere in 
Silicon Valley were challenged by conservationists who complained that 
such projects threatened regulations preserving environmental land use 
regulations. Such conflicting concerns led Jack Ybarra, president of La 
Confederacion de la Raza Unida, to lash out at environmentalists. "If 
they're interested in preserving the foothills for a certain class of 
people," he argued, "then the conservationists are our enemies, 
too."^[*San Jose Mercury*, December 21, 1970. See also *Ybarra v. Town 
of Los Altos Hills*, 503 F.2d 250 (1974).] The landscape was a site of 
economic conflict.

\thoughtbreak{Concerns about the environmental impact of growth} moved 
to the forefront of electoral politics in the early 1970s. Janet Gray 
Hayes was voted into office in 1974, the first woman to serve as mayor 
of a major metropolitan center. San Jose was quickly dubbed the 
"feminist capital of the world" as female politicians assumed positions 
of political power throughout city and county 
government.^[@flammang1985feminist.] Hayes was explicitly an 
environmentalist, identifying her own platform as {DETAIL}.

Hayes appeared to mesh well with the concerns of voters. Voters had 
become increasingly suspicious of urban growth and its synonym progress. 
In one survey, voters identified open space, urban growth, and the 
environment as primary issues. Among their top concerns, voters 
identified pollution, overpopulation, land use planning and zoning, and 
parks and recreation as major concerns leading up to the 1974 
election.^["Survey of Voter Attitudes," 16.]

The 1978 San Jose mayoral campaign came to center around limiting 
growth. 

Her challenger, Al Garza, represented a different set of interests. 
Garza got his start in San Jose politics in {DETAIL}, speaking on behalf of 
developers and maintained his support of San Jose urban growth. <!-- how 
does he define growth? What does that look like? What is "growth"? -->

<!-- OUTLINE

	•	Anti-growth legislation
	⁃	Local Area Formation Commission (LAFCO) created in 1963
	⁃	Quimby Act 1965
	⁃	Knox-Nisbet Act 1963
	⁃	Bay Area Transportation Study early 1960s
	⁃	A state Office of Planning created in 1959, and a Governor's Council on Metropolitan Area Problems
	⁃	Local governments wanted no part of the metropolitan plans, and came together to create a new forum. Suburban officials decided to create the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) in 1961.
	•	Hayes / Garza Mayoral Race -->

<!-- Janet Gray & Al Garza -->

## Palo Alto Stops Industrialization

Palo Alto stops growth; industry moves elsewhere (Mountain View; Sunnyvale)

## Recreation in the Foothills

