---
author:
- 'Jason A. Heppler'
title: |
  | Chapter 5
  | Something in the Soil
...

> The horizon above San Jose is unmarred by smokestacks, and people here
> are proud of that. They have worked hard at making the valley a base
> of the computer-electronics industry and an unpolluted place to live.
>
> ---*New York Times*^["Leaking Chemicals in
> California's Silicon Valley Alarms Neighbors," *New York Times*, May
> 20, 1982.]

> When I first became Mayor and we embarked on an economic development
> program, there was no doubt in my mind that this was a clean industry.
> We now know that we are definitely in the midst of a chemical
> revolution.
>
> ---Janet Gray Hayes, Mayor, San Jose^["Leaking Chemicals in
> California's Silicon Valley Alarms Neighbors," *New York Times*, May
> 20, 1982.]

> All of this industrial activity is hard to notice, however. Driving 
> from Stanford University in Palo Alto to the green hills east of San 
> Jose, one sees no smokestacks at all, and hardly anything that even 
> looks like a factory. . . . It has become obvious that the absence of 
> smokestacks does not mean an absence of environmental problems.
>
> ---Judith Ayres, EPA Region 9 Administrator^[Judith E. Ayres, "Controlling the Dangers 
> from High-Tech Pollution," *EPA Journal* 10 
> (December 1984): 14.]

Construction workers sunk their backhoe into the earth in an early 
November morning in 1981, making way in the soil for a second 
underground industrial solvents storage tank for Fairchild 
Semiconductor's South San Jose facility. Digging near an existing 
storage tank, the workers noticed something about the soil that did not 
seem right: the soil was exceptionally wet and had taken on a 
rust-colored hue and strange odor. Digging deeper they discovered a leak 
in the bottom of the existing storage tank. The leak went undiscovered 
when the above-ground gauge that measured the volume of liquid in the 
tank failed, and the system normally monitoring incoming chemicals had 
not been routinely checked. Concerned about the size of the leak, the 
construction crew reported their finding to Fairchild and the Great Oaks 
Water Company, which operated drinking water wells nearby servicing 
several thousand residents. The water company closed the wells 
immediately. Tests confirmed that an industrial solvent containing the 
carcinogen 1,1,1 trichloroethane (TCA) had leaked from the tank and 
concentrated in the wells at nearly twenty times the permissible limit 
established by the Environmental Protection Agency. Nearly 60,000 
gallons of toxic chemicals had leaked from the tank for at least two 
years.^[Newspaper clipping, "Water contaminated by leak," *San Jose 
Mercury*, January 20, 1982, Folder 2, Box 11, Silicon Valley Toxics 
Coalition Records, San Jose State University Special Collections; "Get 
Tough Now to Avoid Spills," *Gilroy Dispatch*, July 1, 1983; Peter 
Murphy, "Great Oaks Water Company Distribution Study," draft report, 
Folder 1, Box 11, SVTC, SJSU; "High-Tech: a Stain on a 'Clean' Field," 
*Los Angeles Times* December 22, 1983.]

\thoughtbreak{Juliana Ross was only nine months old} in 1982 when she
had her first open-heart surgery. When her mother, Lorraine, opened the
pages of the *San Jose Mercury News* on January 20, she saw the news:
Fairchild Semiconductor, just a quarter mile from her home, had had an
environmental catastrophe. Suddenly, the neighborhood stories and
problems all made sense. Her neighbors in the Los Paseos neighborhood
had complained about the water tasting and smelling funny, but of
greater concern were the four children with birth defects, the two
miscarriages, and the one stillbirth that had taken place on her 
block in the past three years. And her youngest child, nine months old
at the time, faced multiple congenital heart defects.  Lorraine Ross
could not help but wonder if the leak and the health problems were
connected.^[Newspaper clipping, "Water contaminated by leak," *San Jose
Mercury*, January 20, 1982, Folder 2, Box 11, Silicon Valley Toxics
Coalition Records, San Jose State University Special Collections;
newspaper clipping, "Silicon Valley's Fear Over Tainted Water," San
Francisco Chronicle, May 16, 1983, Carton 20, Folder 12 Hazardous Waste,
California Tomorrow Records, MS 3641, California Historical Society;
"Birth defects and chemicals," *San Jose Mercury*, February 3, 1982,
SVTC Records, SJSU.]

News of Fairchild's chemical leak captured the Bay Area's attention in early 1982,
and parents whose children had experienced health problems wondered
about a possible link. Who, Lorraine and her neighbors asked, permitted
Fairchild to store toxic chemicals just feet away from public wells? Who
decided what trace elements found in the water was safe for human
consumption? Why had Fairchild and Great Oaks taken so long to inform
the public about the TCA contamination? The chemicals, Lorraine and her
neighbors discovered, went unregulated. No official requirements were in
place for Fairchild to frequently check its storage tanks. The public
was unaware of the sorts of chemicals used by Fairchild and other high
tech manufacturers, and news of the problem only broke when construction
workers discovered there was a problem. Investigations revealed that the
problem was even more widespread. At least an additional 36 leaks had
occurred throughout the Bay Area, including a tetrachloroethylene (TCE)
leak near an Intel plant that had not used the chemical since 1977.

![Fairchild Semiconductor located across from the Los Paseos neighborhood to the south in South San Jose. *San Jose Mercury News*, February 3, 1982.](figures/fairchild_neighborhood.png)

The Bay Area's contaminated soil and water led to a significant shift in
environmental thought. Although many of the other leaks did not threaten
drinking water supplies, the widespread presence of toxic leaks
concerned many residents in the Valley. For the first time, residents
confronted the reality of Silicon Valley's dependence on
chemicals---that the promise of "clean" industry was not so clean after
all. Stories flooded local headlines: hundreds chemical leaks and spills, a chemical explosion at Lockheed
that forced the evacuation of 400 people from Palo Alto, the stories of
workers exposed to chemicals that caused hair loss, respiratory
problems, skin infections, and worse. Valley residents came to see the
landscape as tainted. "I'm not anti-semiconductor industry," Lorraine
Ross noted, "but I don't want my health adversely affected by their
profit-making. Companies should be willing to invest a portion of their
profit to ensure they aren't damaging the environment."^[Susan Benner,
“Storm Clouds Over Silicon Valley,” *Inc* (September 1982), 84.] By 1992 
studies found at least fifty-seven private and forty-seven public drinking wells were contaminated,
and sixty-six plots of land were too toxic for people to walk upon. County
authorities determined that sixty-five of the seventy-nine companies
they investigated---including IBM, Hewlett-Packard, Raytheon, NEC, AMD,
Signetics, and many others---had contaminated the soil beneath their
plants. The federal government eventually declared twenty-nine Superfund
sites---more than any other county in the nation---twenty-four of which
resulted from electronics firms.^[@pellowpark2002dreams, 75--76.]
Furthermore, the "alphabet soup of toxic wastes"---TCE, PCB, EBD---had
entered the public vocabulary.^["An underground problem surfaces,"
*Chicago Tribune*, February 29, 1984.]

The presence of synthetic and industrial contaminates was a revelation
to Valley suburbanites. In earlier decades, cities had dealt with the
problem of human waste as public health officials learned how to manage
the problem. Experts placed their faith in public health strategies that
asserted definition and control over health threats. Even in San Jose,
the city had learned to deal with its unique problem of sewage and cannery
effluence though an efficient sewer system that could handle massive
volumes of detritus. But now cities of the Bay Area were on the front
lines of widespread contamination by high tech toxics, a situation the
region was unaware and unprepared to confront. Concerns over health
transformed thinking about the regional landscape and introduced a new
spatial thinking about human health.

The proximity of pollutants near suburban areas along the Peninsula
resulted as a consequence of the Bay Area's lack of residential and
industrial urban planning. Because Bay Area cities thought little about
the layout of their environs, industrial facilities and warehouses
frequently turned up alongside residential developments rather than
isolated from the places where people lived. The natural boundaries of
the Peninsula---the Santa Cruz Mountains to the west and the San
Francisco Bay to the east---also kept suburban areas and industry in
close proximity to one another. They simply lacked the space to expand.
The emerging crisis broadened the coalescing environmental movement,
even among those who never considered themselves environmentalists. The
daily lived experiences of the Bay Area's suburbanites expected clean
tap water and believed that the industries near their communities were
clean and green. The toxic landscape shattered that perception.

### Murky Waters: Water Pollution in the Postwar Era

Concerns about drinking water were not new in 1982. Water quality,
sewage disposal and treatment, and waste generation have been staple
issues of urban growth. Urban areas depend on access to fresh water for
sanitation, industrial and municipal development, and public health,
interlocking both water supply and water quality. During the nineteenth
century, cities often treated nearby water supplies as public sewers.
Property owners and industries faced few challenges to how they
determined their use of water resources until public health advocates
during the Progressive Era challenged the environmental conditions that
were leading to public health problems.^[@gottleib2005forcing, 89--92,
95--97; @publichealth1943drinkingwater.]

By December 1970, the month that the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) began operating under the administration of William Ruckelshaus,
Americans were acutely aware of the presence of toxins in their
environment. Environmental issues had become a key political issue, made
all the more visible with the first Earth Day held in May 1970. Congress
passed several pieces of pollution legislation aiming to curb the
discharge of potentially harmful chemicals. The Air Quality Act of 1967,
the Clean Air Act of 1970, Resource Recovery Act of 1970, Federal
Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act Amendments (FIFRA) in 1972,
and 1972 Clean Water Act sought to mandate new environmental
regulations.^[@gottleib2005forcing, 179--180.]

Congress began debate over new drinking water legislation in the early
1970s. The debate took on additional pressure when in 1972 the
Environmental Protection Agency released a study of drinking water
supplies in New Orleans. The study found thirty-six organic chemicals
present, some of which were known carcinogens. An additional study of
New Orleans' contamination by the Environmental Defense Fund published
two years later showed a high incidence of cancer among people whose
primary source of drinking water came from the contaminated surface
waters. New Orleans' contaminated waters helped prompt the passage of
the Safe Drinking Water Act (SWDA) in 1974 that established federal quality
standards.^[@nash2006inescapable, 173; @hays1987beauty, 198. Water
quality standards trace themselves to the early twentieth century when
the U.S. Public Health Service adopted quality standards for drinking
water regarding the presence of *E. coli* used to combat the spread of
typhoid.] SWDA established "maximum contaminant
levels" (MCLs) that, in the words of historian Linda Nash, "assumed . .
. a level of exposure below which no adverse health effects would occur
in any place, at any time."^[@nash2006inescapable, 173.] MCLs also
assumed that all relevant and possibly harmful contaminants were known
to science, although few laboratory tests existed for detecting presence
of organic chemicals.^[@nash2006inescapable, 174; @cox1997safewater.]

<!--
Federal intervention in water issues addressed the presence of toxic
chemicals in non-drinking water sources as well. The passage of the
Clean Water Act of 1972 created guidelines for {DETAIL}. The law
underwent revision in 1977 when the Natural Resources Defense Council
sued the EPA forcing the organization to deal with toxic chemicals found
in water. The courts ruled that the EPA had to control a list of
pollutants, mostly synthetic organic chemicals.^[@hays1987beauty,
198--199.]
-->

Throughout the United States, chemical contamination sites were
uncovered. In California's Central Valley, water quality officials
discovered the contamination of groundwater by
1,2-dibromo-3-choloropropane (DBCP), a compound used by farmers as a
pesticide. In New York, officials in Long Island had been dealing with
contaminted water since the 1940s that included the presence of the
insecticide aldicarb, cadmium, phenol, hexavalent chromium, and
synthetic detergents. Further exacerbating the problem was the sheer
volume of new chemical compounds coming on to the market. In the 1970s,
roughly 500 new chemical compounds appeared on the market each year.
These chemicals had few standards and assessments in place aside from
certain previsions within the SWDA weakly enforced by the EPA. Compounds
and chemicals once thought to pose little environmental risk had, with
their appearance in groundwater, revealed how widespread the
contamination of the country's drinking water supplies had
become.^[@nash2006inescapable, 175--176; @sellers2012crucible, 113--123;
@day2001safedrinking, 21--23.]

The Bay Area's water landscape transformed after World War II. The two
major rivers, the Guadalupe River and the Coyote Creek, and its
tributaries as well as the San Francisco Bay itself were only the most
visible signs of the Bay Area's water landscape. Both had been reshaped
as urban areas expanded rapidly in the postwar era, either through the
river's physical re-routing in canals, dams, and reservoirs, or from
higher water levels pouring over their banks due to urban runoff causing 
excessive amounts of water. Drinking
water was not on the minds of most residents. Not until the 1980s would
the focus turn to the hidden water trapped between layers of clay
and gravel beneath the surface of the cities. Moreover, groundwater
supplies were rarely monitored by either the county or the state of
California. And since high tech industries maintained a perception as
"clean" industry, few thought or were aware that their activities were
introducing chemical contamination.^[@colten1991contamination.]

<!--
Flooding confounded those who wanted borders between the physical and
the social. The heavy winter storm in 1955 washed through Alviso, Santa
Clara, and San Jose, causing extensive damage. Asphalt, concrete, and
soil compaction only worsened runoff and amplified the problem of
flooding. City and county planners turned to technology to tame the
floods, looking primarily to the Army Corps of Engineers to fund new
channels and dikes that would funnel water safely into the Bay.
Technology, they hoped, could tame nature.

To city boosters the problem lay with the rivers themselves, not the
dramatic changes that occurred on the lands around the rivers. The
solution to the river's inadequacies could be solved by engineering.
Although floodplains had always been a frequent presence in the
flatlands of the Valley, city boosters and Army Corps engineers saw the
rivers as reformers saw them in the early 1900s---channels for moving
floodwaters away from cities. But the old river had changed.

California enacted state laws in the 1960s governing the regulation of
water.
-->

### "Fairchild or My Child?"

![Lorraine Ross and her daughter Juliana. "Silicon Valley's Fear Over Tainted Water," *San Francisco Chronicle*, May 16, 1983.](figures/lorraine_ross_profile.png)

The Los Paseos neighborhood sparked what one newspaper called the "birth
of an eco-tragedy."^["Birth of an eco-tragedy" *Los Angeles Herald
Examiner*, February 10, 1982.] Along with the Fairchild leak, the nearby
International Business Machines facility announced the discovery of a
TCA leak shortly after the Fairchild leak was revealed. Studies would
later find that the IBM leak was among the worst in the South Bay,
contaminating twenty-five public and private wells.^[Peter Murphy,
"Great Oaks Water Distribution Study," 1988, 1, Folder 1, Box 11, SVTC
records, SJSU; Ted Smith oral history, Berkeley, 19; Ted Smith and Mike 
Belliveau, "Responsible action
needed in IBM's toxic waste cleanup," *San Jose Business Journal*, April
7, 1986, Folder 3, Box 18, Santa Clara County Center for Occupational Health
(SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records,
MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State University Library Special Collections &
Archives.] To Lorraine Ross and her neighbors, the presence of chemicals
in the suburban neighborhood was as much a spatial experience as a
personal one. "It takes a lot of nerve for them to invade a pre-existing
residential neighborhood, pour dangerous chemicals into a leaking tank,
poison the surrounding environment and hide the fact from the people
affected by their negligence."^[Quoted in @pellowpark2002dreams, 74.]
Ross helped galvanize the community into political action, first
surveying her neighbors that turned up a list of seventy-two people who
reported birth defects and health problems.^[Lorraine Ross, "State Study
Confirms Birth Defect Cluster," *Silicon Valley Toxics News* (April
1985), 3; "San Jose Hearing Points Up Toxic Risks at Area Plants,"
*California AFL-CIO News*, February 11, 1983.] The problem seemed so
widespread to not be a coincidence. Ross presented the results of her
survey to city officials as evidence of a serious problem.^["Leaking
Chemicals in California's Silicon Valley Alarm Neighbors," *New York
Times*, May 20, 1982.]

Lorraine Ross had relocated her family south to the city of Gilroy by
1983, but she continued to be a vocal presence in the Bay Area's
anti-toxics campaign. At her new home in Gilroy, the presence of
industry near suburban areas continued to be a spatial experience and
informed the political critique of toxics. The disk manufacturer Dysan
planned a facility at the Santa Teresa Technology Park in Gilroy.
Although not opposed to its construction, Ross warned her new city that
they could not "accept the dictates of Realtors and developers when it
comes to determining the health of our families. You all have the right
to talk loudly. It's important that Gilroy plan ahead for
industry."^["Get tough now to avoid spills," *Gilroy Dispatch*, August
1, 1983, Folder 5, Box 10, Santa Clara County Center for
Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC)
Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State University Library Special
Collections & Archives.] Communities had to insist on their health.

<!--
In 1982, Lorraine Ross found herself becoming a community activist. She
began connecting with others in Los Paseos to determine if health
problems were a widespread problem. Surveying others in her
neighborhood, she turned up a list of seventy-two people who reported
health problems and birth defects.^[Lorraine Ross, "State Study Confirms
Birth Defect Cluster," *Silicon Valley Toxics News* (April 1985), 3;
"San Jose Hearing Points Up Toxic Risks at Area Plants," *California
AFL-CIO News*, February 11, 1983.] Along with the Fairchild leak,
International Business Machines in South San Jose, located near the
Fairchild facility, announced the discovery of a smaller leak in 1983 as
well, contaminating another Great Oaks well. ^[Peter Murphy, "Great Oaks
Water Distribution Study," 1988, 1, Folder 1, Box 11, SVTC records,
SJSU; Ted Smith oral history, Berkeley, 19.] The IBM leak contaminated
twenty-five public and private wells and had spread to be the largest
contamination problem in the valley.^["Responsible action needed in
IBM's toxic waste cleanup," *San Jose Business Journal*, April 7, 1986,
{FILL} Santa Clara County Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and
Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose
State University Library Special Collections & SJSU Archives.] The widespread presence of leaks in San Jose
led to what one newspaper called the "birth of an eco-tragedy."^["Birth
of an eco-tragedy" *Los Angeles Herald Examiner*, February 10, 1982.]
-->

The core issue emerging in the anti-toxics campaign was whether
scientific evidence existed to support the claim that exposure to
industrial solvents caused the birth defects. The debate over
contamination and health originally coalesced around the lack of
scientific evidence to support the neighborhood's claim. Fairchild
maintained that the length of exposure to the chemicals were not long
enough to cause health effects. Basing their claim on the state standard
for TCA exposure, they argued that those standards were set with
long-term and high-level exposure as the baseline. Fairchild also
challenged the timeline of the chemical leak and its link to birth
defects. The company estimated that the leaks began 18 months before
they were discovered and took up to sixteen months to travel the 2,000
feet to the Great Oaks wells. The birth defects that began three years
prior, Fairchild argued, could not possibly be connected if their leak
started relatively recently and exposed people to such low levels of
TCA.^["Birth of an eco-tragedy," *Los Angeles Herald Examiner*, February
10, 1982.]

Residents were unsatisfied by industry's answers. The concentration of
birth defects in Los Paseos confirmed the presence of a problem, and
they linked the local environment as the most likely cause. Like other
parts of the Bay Area's environmental activism, women led the way in
prompting action by government officials. Mothers in Los
Paseos---Lorraine Ross, Mary Lou Lujan, Julie Bowman, and others---took
on the task of protecting their children and their community. They
developed their own theories as to what was going on in Los Paseos, and
focused their critique around female bodies and pregnancy. In their
view, the spatialized frequency of pregnancy problems were directly
related to the local landscape. Unconvinced by Fairchild's argument that
the level and length of exposure was too short, they instead insisted
that the only explanation lay with the chemical leak. Families in Los
Paseos, Lorraine Ross insisted, felt "like human guinea pigs whose
health is being tested by the 'high-tech' companies doing business in
our valley."^["We Demand Safe Water," SVTC mailer, n.d., Folder 4, Box
10, Santa Clara County Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and
Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose
State University Library Special Collections & Archives.]

Under pressure by neighborhood activists, media interest, and political
fallout, the county agreed to study the potential for a link between
groundwater contamination and health problems that plagued Los Paseos in
1982. County health officials began by looking at birth certificate and
infant-death and fetal-death records to reveal the possibility of a
cluster of deaths or illnesses in the city. Their early report found "no
significant difference" between the neighborhood's birth disorder rate
and the county's birth disorder rate.^["Study of birth defects
continues," *San Jose Mercury News*, February 25, 1982, Folder 2, Box
11, Santa Clara County Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and
Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose
State University Library Special Collections & Archives.] County water
quality officials also initiated an investigation into tapwater and
wellwater throughout the county. In the South Bay near Los Paseos, water
sampling revealed trace levels of TCA and DCE, but the amounts were
below the state action level to shut down the wells.^["Environmental
News Fact Sheet: Status Report, South Bay Tapwater Sampling Program,"
November 5, 1984, Folder 14, Box 12, Santa Clara County Center
for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition
(SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State University Library
Special Collections & Archives; "Proposed South Bay Sampling Event,
October 9," Folder 14, Box 12, Santa Clara County Center for
Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC)
Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State University Library Special
Collections & Archives.]

In addition to the birth certificate survey, county health officials
formed the Santa Clara County Health Advisory Committee on Environmental
Teratology and agreed in the spring of 1982 that enough evidence existed
for a formal investigation. The county turned to epidemiology to study
the spatial pattern of disease in San Jose. Epidemiology's disciplinary
history roots itself in studies of space to understand whether diseases
had a spatial component that could explain health issues in
landscapes.^[@nash2006inescapable, 185. See also
@pearce1996epidemiology; @susser1985epidemiology.]
The goal of the county's study sought to determine if lifestyle or
environmental features affected the health of the Los Paseos community
as compared to demographically-similar communities without any known
contamination. The study was released in 1985 with no conclusive
evidence to support the claims of neighborhood activists. The study
reached two key conclusions: the neighborhood of Los Paseos experienced
higher rates of miscarriages and a threefold increase in total birth
defects compared to nearby communities that had no known water
contamination, and the community experienced a two-and-a-half times
higher rate of major heart defects compared to the rest of the county.
The study, however, made no causal link between the contamination and
the high presence of birth defects, citing the lack of water monitoring
prior to 1981 that could provide potential data on a link between health
effects and contaminated water.^["State Health Department Releases
Fairchild Studies," Department of Health Services *News News*, January
16, 1985, 1, Folder 8, Box 12, Santa Clara County Center for
Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC)
Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State University Library Special
Collections & Archives.]

The study did little to stem public concern and only served to
strengthen the resolve of the anti-toxic activists, who used the
conclusion to continue to point out the presence of an adverse health
cluster in San Jose.^[Lorraine Ross, "State Study Confirms Birth Defect
Cluster," *Silicon Valley Toxics News* (April 1985): 3, Folder 3, Box
18, Santa Clara County Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and
Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose
State University Library Special Collections & Archives.] But the
widespread presence of toxic contamination throughout the Bay Area and
other parts of California gave political energy to the state
legislature. In 1986, the state legislature overwhelmingly supported the
passage of Proposition 65, the Safe Drinking Water and Toxic Exposure
Act. Prop 65 made it illegal for businesses to knowingly pollute
drinking water with known cancer-causing chemicals and required the
immediate notification of the public to any potential exposure to toxic
chemicals.

<!--
Activity by the Los Paseos community followed a legal route as well. In
1983 several Los Paseos families filed suit against Fairchild
Semiconductor, IBM, and the Great Oaks Water Company. The case
eventually settled in 1986 for an undisclosed amount of money for the
530 residents involved with the suit. The companies paid a
multimillion-dollar settlement, an amount, resident's attorney John
Tyndall explained, that was "far more of a significant settlement in
terms of what the people are actually getting" than the Love Canal
lawsuit in New York.^["Pact reached in tainted-water dispute," *San Jose
Mercury News*, July 4, 1986, Folder 8, Box 12, Santa Clara County Center
for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition
(SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State University Library
Special Collections & Archives.]
-->

Industry faced another potent challenge to their "clean" image: the
neighborhood of Love Canal in New York. Like the toxic spill in San
Jose, the neighborhood of Love Canal in Niagara Falls galvanized
community activists in 1978 after decades of chemical dumping by Hooker
Chemical led to widespread health effects in the community. The company
had buried nearly 21,000 tons of chemical waste at the site, and the
area became such a concern that the federal government relocated 800
families. The disaster at Love Canal led to Congress passing the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act
(CERCLA), or Superfund Act.^[@gottleib2005forcing, 246--248;
@rothman2000saving, 192--195.] In the Bay Area, activists pointed to
Love Canal as the potential future for Silicon Valley. The Santa Clara
County Labor Council's business manager, Peter Cervantes-Gautschi,
observed that "we want to prevent San Jose from being transformed into
another Love Canal."^["Big Turnout Urged in San Jose to Curb Toxic
Contamination," *California AFL-CIO News*, January 28, 1983, Folder 5,
Box 10, Santa Clara County Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and
Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose
State University Library Special Collections & Archives. See also "Labor
in lead on toxic controls," *Santa Clara County Labor*, February 11,
1983, Folder 5, Box 10, Santa Clara County Center for Occupational 
Health (SSOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, 
MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose STate University Library Special Collections & 
Archives.] These concerns reflected a
new environmentalism in California, one still grounded locally but
concerned about issues beyond the flora and fauna of the region that
remained the bailiwick of other Bay Area conservation movements. The Bay
Area had become, as Hal Rothman once phrased it, a symbol of "the
toxicity of progress."^[@rothman2000saving, 195.] What made the
contamination even more insidious was its apparent invisibility. At Love
Canal, toxic wastes oozed to the surface, fires spontaneously ignited
during summers, children tossed chunks of phosphorus against the ground
causing white sparks, and the odor was
ever-persistent.^[@rothman2000saving, 192.] In Santa Clara County, there
were no visible signs of the toxic landscape.

<!--
The State Regional Water Quality Control Board decided not to indict IBM
in its contamination, a move that outraged anti-toxics
environmentalists.
-->

Anticipating the spread of chemicals in the Valley proved difficult due
to the region's history. Humans had altered the land in significant ways
that affected the aquifers. One of those ways was the burying of the built
environment. During new construction, many agricultural pipes used for
carrying water through fields or pumping groundwater to the surface were
buried. As one study found, these pipes allowed contaminated water to
more easily travel through the clay and gravel strata:

> It is estimated that there are about ten thousand well pipes in the
> Valley which extend from the surface to a depth of 30 to 150 feet into
> the ground.  These were well pipes for agricultural uses on the farms.
> When the factories were built throughout Silicon Valley, most of these
> well pipes were simply buried. No one knows any longer where the
> majority of these well pipes are located. After careful searches
> through the records of the water authorities and other governmental
> agencies, about three thousand old well pipes were located. The
> unidentified pipes which remain puncture the clay strata and permit
> chemically contaminated ground water to seep into the underground
> water supplies, whereby toxic substances are distributed far and
> wide.^[Quoted in @pellowpark2002dreams, 78. The EPA also suspected
> that abandoned or improperly constructed wells allowed contaminants to
> reach deep aquifers by giving contaminated water a conduit to travel
> deeper into the ground. See "EPA Superfund Factsheet," 1, Folder 3, Box
> 11, Santa Clara County Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and
> Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San
> Jose State University Library Special Collections & Archives.]

\noindent Like the built environment above, the underground
complex of aquifers reflected the relationship between natural and human
history. The location and movement of contamination changed not only due
to the geological features of the aquifers but human history that had
altered the hydrological features of the Valley.

The lack of monitoring and regulation meant that no evidence of danger 
was detected by county or state water quality officials. By the early 
1980s high tech continued to enjoy a reputation as a clean industry 
unmarred by the smokestacks---an aesthetic concern for Bay Area 
residents---or agricultural runoff problems that characterized other 
parts of California and the country's industrial centers. Human health, 
as historian Linda Nash has suggested for the Central Valley of 
California, was the only barometer to detect 
problems.^[@nash2006inescapable, 181.] Or, as historian Brett Walker 
argues, "people really do physiologically experience nations' policies 
and priorities" from industrial diseases that become "physical 
inscriptions of the nation's policies on the body."^[@walker2012toxic.] 
By mid-1982, the problem was undeniable. Reports that California 
companies had discharged nearly 1.4 million tons of hazardous wastes in 
a single year spurred local and regional government to act.^["The 
industries creating the most waste," *Sacramento Union*, April 18, 1982, 
Folder 8, Box 12, Santa Clara County Center for Occupational Health 
(SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, 
MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State University Library Special Collections & 
Archives.] The connection between environment and bodily health focused 
itself in the Los Paseos neighborhood and would ripple throughout the 
country.

### The Tap Water Rebellion

Lorraine Ross continued to work with her neighbors and
document evidence, serving as part of a vocal and persistent group of
activists that used the contamination of water to argue that industry
and urban growth threatened social stability, environmental quality, and
the health of residents. They located in the region's environmental,
social, and economic problems the lack of structures present to protect
city's environs. A coalition of housewives, laborers, environmental
activists, layers, doctors, businesspeople, and minorities challenged
the notion that high tech industry was "clean" industry and came to
dominate the political discussion of industry's value to the Bay Area.
Significantly, the political discussion of the environment began to
shift. The previous decades of environmentalists and conservationists in
the Bay Area focused on the health of nature, a point of contention that
emerged among the justice-oriented activists of the 1980s. During
the decade, a new environmental critique emerged focusing on
environmental justice and the health of humans.

Ted Smith, a young San Jose attorney, led the way in building bridges
between these groups. Smith's involvement in environmental issues were
personal as well as professional. A New Yorker by birth, Smith moved to
Washington, D.C., in the late 1960s, where he worked under President
Lyndon Johnson's anti-poverty VISTA program for two years before moving
to the Bay Area to earn a law degree from Stanford and start his own San
Jose practice in 1973.^[@mahon1985chargedbodies, 252.] His experiences
in VISTA and witnessing riots and demonstrations in the Capitol deeply
shaped Smith's attitudes towards social justice. "I think things were so
intense then," he recalled, "that I just haven't been able to put it out
of my soul."^[@mahon1985chargedbodies, 261.] Smith's upbringing exposed
him to activism and social justice. His mother was a social activist,
involved with the League of Women Voters, the YWCA, and the World Youth
Convention. "I think some of her experiences and sensibilities were
passed on," he recalled.^[Ted Smith oral history, Berkeley, 2.]
Environmental issues were not part of Smith's early political activism
as he directed his energy into the civil rights and peace movements. But
his work on those issues shaped his later thinking about environmental
politics and early legal career.^[Ted Smith, oral history, Berkeley,
4--6.] Smith began his law practice as a labor lawyer representing
cannery workers facing racial discrimination and injuries on the job,
but found himself drawn more and more to the Bay Area's electronic
industry through his representation of industrial workers.  His
conviction that industry had destroyed nature in the Bay Area was formed
in the crucible of labor rights. Through his wife, Amanda Hawes, a legal
services attorney and founder of the Project on Health and Safety in
Electronics (PHASE), Smith began to connect with clients injured by
chemical exposure inside electronics manufacturing facilities. "The
electronics industry," Smith observed, "was actually a chemical-handling
industry."^[Ted Smith, oral history, Berkeley, 13.] The number of
clients coming to him with disabling injuries, illnesses, and diseases
sparked his interest in the industry and the heavy reliance on chemicals
in the manufacture of electronics. Smith believed working conditions and
environmental concerns went hand-in-hand, and the discovery of the
Fairchild leak provided him with an opportunity to tie the two together
and raise awareness on both issues.^[Ted Smith, oral history, interview
by Glenna Matthews, San Jose State University; @mahon1985chargedbodies,
252--253; "Ted Smith: Foes Think He's Anti-Business, but Fans Say He's
Earth's Advocate," *The Business Journal Magazine*, October 15, 1990,
12, in Folder 3, Box 18, Santa Clara Center for Occupational Health
(SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records,
MSS-2007--04--06, San Jose State University Library Special Collections
& Archives; Smith oral history, Berkeley, 14.]

![Ted Smith, "Pioneer Activist for Environmental Justice
in Silicon Valley, 1967--2000," an oral history conducted in 2000 by Carl
Wilmsen, Regional Oral History Office, The Bancroft Library, University
of California, Berkeley, 2003.](figures/smith_svtc.png)

The issue of toxics and chemical storage continued to gain attention
over the course of 1982. In June, an explosion at IBM's South San Jose
plant from improperly stored aluminum waste injured eighteen people. The
chip manufacturer also reported a leak at the same facility that dated
back to 1972. Hewlett-Packard reported five chemical leaks dating back
at least two years at their Palo Alto headquarters. Moffett Airfield's
became one of the worst contamination areas, with nineteen different
sites on the naval air base eventually identified as toxic spills. One
study by the Santa Clara Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB)
found that 85% of the test wells they dug tested positive for water
contamination by industrial solvents. Reports of leaks and spills became
so common that the *San Jose Mercury News* editorialized in February
1982 that "if the present pattern continues, this newspaper might have
to stop printing a separate story about each Silicon Valley hazardous
chemical leak and just run a daily box score in agate type." Almost no
part of the landscape, it seemed, remained untouched by
industry.^["Anti-spill measures still pend," *San Jose Mercury*, July
24, 1982, Folder 5, Box 10, Santa Clara Center for Occupational Health
(SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records,
MSS-2007--04--06, San Jose State University Library Special Collections
& Archives; map of spills and chemical leaks produced by Citizens for a
Better Environment, Folder 4, Box 10, Santa Clara Center for
Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC)
Records, MSS-2007--04--06, San Jose State University Library Special
Collections & Archives; "Industrial chemicals in Palo Alto," *Palo Alto
Weekly*, November 3, 1982, Folder 5, Box 10, Santa Clara Center for
Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC)
Records, MSS-2007--04--06, San Jose State University Library Special
Collections & Archives; "We Demand Safe Water," SVTC mailer, n.d.,
Folder 4, Box 10, Santa Clara Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH)
and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007--04--06,
San Jose State University Library Special Collections & Archives; "How
safe is our drinking water?" *San Jose Mercury News*, February 27, 1982,
Folder 2, Box 11, Santa Clara Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH)
and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007--04--06,
San Jose State University Library Special Collections & Archives.]

Keeping the public educated and maintaining a public voice for those
affected by industrial contamination and chemical exposure became
Smith's first priority. In front of the San Jose city hall on November
4, 1982, the Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) announced its
establishment. In a letter circulated to community organizations and
individuals, SVTC explained its purpose:

> ...we believe now is the time to pull together a coalition to further
> organize around these issues. In recent discussions with
> representatives from labor, health, environmental and community
> organizations and groups, it has been clear that such a coalition is
> not only *essential* but it is *feasible* to get off the ground in the
> immediate future. . . . We proposed the name SILICON VALLEY TOXICS
> COALITION, the long-term goal of which would be to maintain our
> communities and workplaces free from toxic contamination.^["High Tech
> and Toxics: A Guide for Local Communities" photocopy excerpts, Folder
> 2, Box 18, Santa Clara County Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH)
> and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06,
> San Jose State University Library Special Collections & Archives, 331; emphasis
> original. Full publication in *High Tech and Toxics*, Golden Empire
> Planning Center, 1985, in Folder 3, Box 18, Santa Clara County Center
> for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition
> (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State University Library
> Special Collections & Archives.]

\noindent Formed with the financial and personnel support from the Santa
Clara County Occupational Health and Safety (SCCOSH) organization,
SVTC's immediate goal was to pass a model toxic wastes ordinance while
simultaneously becoming a key voice in the debate over chemicals in the
Bay Area.^["Group fights for toxic-waste ordinance," *Peninsula Times
Tribune*, November 4, 1982, Folder 2, Box 10, Santa Clara Center for
Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC)
Records, MSS-2007--04--06, San Jose State University Library Special
Collections & Archives. PHASE renamed itself into SCCOSH in the early
1980s.] Technology companies "still promoted themselves as clean
industry," Smith recalled. "So this was shocking news to people
here."^[Smith oral history, Matthews, 17.] As the perception surrounding
"clean" industry collapsed, Smith was determined to keep the pressure on
industry.

What gave Smith and others a push to organize more formally---and became
SVTC's first major campaign---was a 1982 proposal by the Santa Clara
County Fire Chiefs' Association (SCCFCA) to set forth regulations
regarding chemical storage and reporting leaks.^[Ted Smith, oral
history, Matthews, 16; @mahon1985chargedbodies, 254.] Firefighters were
first responders to chemical spills and leaks, and the Fire Chiefs'
Association wanted to ensure that firefighters knew what they would be
dealing with if they arrived at the scene. Along with a coalition of
businesses and trade groups, they formed an organization called the
Industry Environmental Coordinating Committee in the spring of 1982 to
codify what was called the Hazardous Materials Model Code to the San
Jose city council. The ordinance aimed to set county-wide standards for
the storage and handling of toxic or flammable chemicals.^[Clipping,
"Group fights for toxic-waste ordinance," *Peninsula Times Tribune*,
November 4, 1982, Folder 2, Box 10, Santa Clara Center for Occupational
Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records,
MSS-2007--04--06, San Jose State University Library Special Collections
& Archives; Smith oral history, Berkeley, 16; "Anti-spill measures still
pend," *San Jose Mercury News*, July 24, 1982, SVTC Records, SJSU.] The
Hazardous Materials ordinance face stiff resistance from industry, who
largely argued against revealing chemicals stored on their property that
potentially threatened to reveal trade secrets. Service station owners
also objected to some of the stipulations of the model ordinance,
arguing that the new regulations would force smaller business to close
as the regulation costs could not be met. But industry also faced
a furious public and a media less predisposed to support them. The *San
Jose Mercury News* was quick to support environmental regulatory
measures controlling toxic chemicals.^["Danger: Hazardous Materials,"
*San Jose Mercury News*, February 3, 1982, Folder 5, Box 10, SVTC,
SJSU.]

Despite industrial resistance, the model ordinance passed with
widespread endorsement of the Inter-Governmental Council, a coalition of
Bay Area city managers led by Sunnyvale manager Thomas Lewcock, San Jose
Mayor Janet Gray Hayes, the Santa Clara County Regional Water District,
and was quickly adopted by Peninsula cities.^["Contamination law gets
approval from Sunnyvale," *San Jose Mercury News*, March 23, 1983,
Folder 5, Box 10, Santa Clara County Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and
Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose
State University Library Special Collections & Archives; "San Jose OKs
ordinance regulating chemical storage," *San Jose Mercury News*,
February 23, 1983, Folder 5, Box 10, Santa Clara County Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and
Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose
State University Library Special Collections & Archives; "Cupertino orders
hazardous materials permits," *San Jose Mercury News*, August 2, 1983,
Folder 5, Box 10, Santa Clara County Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and
Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose
State University Library Special Collections & Archives.] However,
environmentalists were not completely satisfied with the passage of the
final model ordinance. The ordinance had gone far in protecting
employees who disclosed their employer's chemical disposal practices,
imposed new regulations requiring double-walled storage containers and
new leak detection systems, obtain permits from their home cities for
chemical storage, and required companies to identify all stored
chemicals. But a key component of the ordinance that environmentalists
wanted was the expansion of the toxic chemicals list to 800 rather than
the 30 defined by the Environmental Protection
Agency.^["Intergovernmental panel endorses stiff rules to protect ground
water," *San Jose Mercury News*, February 5, 1983, Folder 5, Box 10,
Santa Clara County Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon
Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State
University Library Special Collections & Archives; "Water tests will
begin next week," *San Jose Mercury News*, March 24, 1982, Folder 8, Box
12, Santa Clara County Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and
Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose
State University Library Special Collections & Archives.]

The ordinance's adoption by several Peninsula cities had
repercussions that spread beyond the borders of the county. In July
1983, Democratic state senator Byron Sher of Palo Alto introduced
Assembly Bill 1362 to the State Legislature that sought to force
industries to meet specific requirements for the storage of chemicals,
require permits and regular inspections of storage tanks, and require
the reporting of leaks within twenty-four hours of their discovery.
Sher's bill was modeled after the county ordinance, tweaked so that it
could be applied to the entire state. The bill received widespread
support from the Sierra Club, Federated Firefighters of California,
SVTC, CBE, Health Officers Organization of California, and the
California League of Cities.^["Why We Need AB 1362," Silicon Valley
Toxics Coalition mailer, July 25, 1983, Folder 2, Box 10, Santa Clara
Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics
Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007--04--06, San Jose State University
Library Special Collections & Archives.] Furthermore, SVTC's additions
for containment, monitoring, and regulations influenced changes to the
Superfund law in the late 1980s. When California Representative Norman
Mineta introduced House Bill 5640 to the floor of the House, Smith wrote
urging Mineta to redefine "imminent hazard" provisions in the Superfund
act and to implement stricter design standards for containing possible
leaks.^[Letter from Ted Smith to Norman Mineta, July 23, 1984, Folder 3,
Box 11, Santa Clara
Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics
Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007--04--06, San Jose State University
Library Special Collections & Archives.] Mineta endorsed Smith's recommendations,
adding the two suggestions to the Superfund amendments. Although the
bill failed to make it through the Senate, the adoption of Santa Clara
regulations into federal legislation demonstrates just how important
Silicon Valley's case had become to the anti-toxics legislation.^[Letter
from Norman Mineta to Ted Smith, October 25, 1984, Folder 3, Box 11, Santa Clara
Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics
Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007--04--06, San Jose State University
Library Special Collections & Archives.]

<!-- where am I going with this?
The work of the Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition in helping craft and
advocate the model toxic ordinance had shaped local, state, and federal
law. But for Ted Smith and other anti-toxics activists, the work had only just
begun. "We are the leader in this because we are the leader in
contamination of our ground water," Smith observed. The model ordinance
tackled one half of the problem by identifying weaknesses {MORE}
-->

At the heart of the debate over the toxic ordinances was a public policy
dispute about the unknown effects of high technology's industrial
chemicals.  The debate, according to Smith, addressed the question of
"who should bear the risks of scientific uncertainty---the victims of
toxic exposure or the manufacturers and users of toxic
chemicals?"^[Clipping, "Voters should join tap water rebellion," no
source, no date, Folder 6, Box 10, Santa Clara County Center for
Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC)
Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State University Library Special
Collections & Archives.] Smith and others would give voice to a
frustration felt by many in the Bay Area summed up in the debate over
"How Clean Is Clean?" The greatest source of resentment towards state
officials came in 1985 when the state water pollution control board
decided not to prosecute IBM for its chemical leak in South San Jose. In
a 4-3 vote, the Board decided that IBM's \$34 million clean-up plan had
shown sufficient evidence that the company was serious about cleaning up
its chemical leak and warranted no further state action.^["State won't
punish IBM for toxic leak," *San Jose Mercury News*, February 21, 1985,
Folder 8, Box 12, Santa Clara County Center for Occupational Health
(SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records,
MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State University Library Special Collections &
Archives.] Activists were outraged at the board's decision. "Here we
have a state agency telling the largest computer company in the world
with one of the largest toxic waste spills in the world that it will not
have to pay any penalties," Ted Smith fumed. "That's the wrong message
to get out."^["IBM leak decision criticized," San Jose Mercury News
February 22, 1985, Folder 8, Box 12, Santa Clara County Center for
Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC)
Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State University Library Special
Collections & Archives.]

![Frustration with the argument for "acceptable levels of risk." *Silicon Valley Toxics News* 1 (April 1985): 3.](figures/cartoon_birth_defects.png)

Who was allowed to define "acceptable risk"? SVTC wanted action against
IBM. Before a public hearing in December 1984, members of SVTC argued
that IBM violated the state's Nondegredation Policy that called for the
"maximum feasible restoration of polluted waters." IBM had failed to
uphold that policy, they argued. Their position shaed support from the
Santa Clara County Board of Supervisors, the San Jose City Council, and
the Santa Clara Valley Water District. Yet the Regional Board voted 6-1
to grant relief to IBM and voted 4-3 to not fine them for extensive
groundwater pollution.^["IBM Markets New Product---'Acceptable Risk'",
*Silicon Valley Toxics News* (April 1985): 8, Folder 3, Box 18, SVTC
records, SJSU.] The issue of "acceptable" exposure to contaminants had
become a key point for SVTC, and they began lobbying for the state and
the Environmental Protection Agency to redefine what counted as
appropriate levels of exposure.^["Analysis in Support of Conclusion that
Existing 'Action Level' for TCA is Too High," n.d., Folder 14, Box 12,
Santa Clara County Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon
Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State
University Library Special Collections & Archives; "IBM Fouls Our Nest,"
*Silicon Valley Toxics News* 4 (Spring 1986): 1, 5, 1986, Folder 64, Box
3, League of Women Voters, SJSU.] When the EPA released a study of
Silicon Valley in 1985 presenting an overview of contamination sites,
environmentalists charged that the EPA failed to understand the public
health risks.^["SVTC's Public Voice in Decision Making," *Silicon Valley
Toxics News* 3 (Winter 1985): 2, Folder 64, Box 3, League of Women
Voters, SJSU.] SVTC carried the support of state senators in making
their case. In a letter to Governor George Deukmejian, state senator
John Vasconcellos argued that the State Health Department was "unable to
rule out the possibility that TCA might have been a factor in the excess
rate of birth defects and miscarriages around the Fairchild site." If
the state failed to fully understand the "potential health risks
associated with TCA," Vasconcellos argued, then the State Health
Department risked violating its own Action Level regulations. How could
the Health Department continue to treat TCA as having a safe level of
exposure, Vasconcellos wondered, if TCA is discovered to be a
carcinogen?^[Letter from John Vasconcellos to George Deukmejian,
February 22, 1985, Folder 3, Box 18, Santa Clara County Center for
Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC)
Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State University Library Special
Collections & Archives.]

The debate over carcinogens and safe exposure to chemicals reveals
another facet of SVTC's focus on environmental justice. SVTC framed
their concerns within the language of science, invoking groundwater
pollution, epidemiology, and chemistry in their arguments over the
shifting landscapes that intimately and unknowingly affected
communities. The environment took on a different hue for social justice
activists, in contrast to the mainstream liberal environmental
organizations and their traditional concerns of conservation. Rather,
their energy focused on health, disease, the disenfranchised, and the
structural problems of society that exposed communities to dangerous
environments. The mainstream environmental groups, Ted Smith argued, were
"too elitist" and "too often care more about trees and birds than they
do about people."^[Smith oral history, Berkeley, 6.] Their claims were
grounded in civil rights and argued for policies that supported equality
of health, protection from toxins, and regulations that ensured safety. They
placed faith in local laws to protect communities without power,
and looked to the federal government to enforce equal protections.

SVTC's arguments took on a spatiality of their own as well. Not all
spaces were created equal. In their analysis, business and government
turned a blind eye to poor and nonwhite communities, in some cases
offloading pollution onto these communities. Modern space, then,
mattered a great deal to SVTC. Where one lived in the Valley, where one
worked in the Valley, could have a tremendous impact on a person's
health. Health became spatialized as well, used as an indicator for a
particular sort of landscape that threatened bodies. Ill health, they
argued, could result from a particular place they occupied rather than
individual causes of disease. In contrast to the claims of public
health experts, the modern landscape did not automatically confer clean
spaces.^[@nash2006inescapable, 204; @lefebvre1992space, 194--205.]

Specific spaces were polluted places. South San Jose was only one major
area of concern for the Bay Area's environmentalists. Another
significant contamination site was located in Mountain View in what
became known as MEW---an area of land bounded by Middlefield, Ellis, and
Whisman roads. By 1989 the site was found to have the highest chemical
concentrations and largest plumes than any other site in the Valley. The
EPA estimates for cleanup varied widely, in best cases aquifers would be
returned to usable states between two and forty-five years. But thew
EPA's worst-case scenario estimated that it could take three hundred
years for cleanup to resolve the contamination of surface waters and
shallow aquifers.^["Mt. View Sites May Take 300 Years to Clean Up,"
*Silicon Valley Toxics News* 7 (Winter 1989): 4, Folder 64, League of
Women Voters; Ted Smith oral history, Berkeley, 27.] Even worse was the
unforeseen consequence of chemicals mixing underground. The MEW plume
migrated to Moffett Airfield's space, a nearly two-mile long and 500
foot deep layer of contamination. The mixing of the MEW plume and
Moffett's own leaks and spills resulted in the appearance of a chemical
not used by any nearby facilities. In 1989 vinyl chloride was discovered
in the groundwater under Moffett. The mixing of perchloroethylenes and
trichloroethylenes with petroleum byproducts on the Moffett site began
breaking down the compounds into dichloroethylenes and vinyl
chloride.^[Smith oral history, Berkeley, 62; "Mt. View Sites May Take
300 Years to Clean Up," *Silicon Valley Toxics News* (Winter 1989): 4,
Folder 64, Box 3, League of Women Voters, San Jose/Santa Clara chapter 
Records, MSS-2006-09-01, San Jose State University Library Special 
Collections and Archives.] Chemical reactions underground
were reshaping the Valley's environment.

The spatialized pollution landscape took on greater importance as SVTC,
state and county health officials, and local politicians raced to
comprehend the plume size and spread of chemical leaks. The widespread
presence of water-borne chemicals appeared to be getting out of hand.
Despite efforts to identify leaks and the passage of local laws to
regulate the storage of chemicals, local governments were unprepared to
shoulder the burden. In the wake of the leaks, San Jose established a
new Office of Environmental Management tasked with overseeing the 
implementation of the city's hazardous materials ordinance.
But in many cities the hazardous ordinance went unfollowed or difficult 
to enforce in
cities that had passed the ordinance. Sunnyvale reported in 1986 that
only 189 out of 745 companies had passed inspection of hazardous
chemicals storage.  The Bayview Industrial Park in south San Francisco
was leveled after an illegal fireworks factory exploded in early April
1986. Firefighers responding to the scene had no knowledge of what
materials were on-site.  City fire officials admitted after the blaze
that it had not implemented the hazardous ordinance program passed by
the city. County-wide, cities had processed only forty-nine percent of
permit applications for the storage of chemicals.^["Slow progress in
cataloging toxic threats," *San Jose Mercury News*, April 13, 1986,
Folder 5, Box 10, Santa
Clara County Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley
Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State
University Library Special Collections & Archives; "Cities lag on enforcing toxics
laws," *San Jose Mercury News*, January 1, 1986, Folder 5, Box 10, Santa
Clara County Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley
Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State
University Library Special Collections & Archives.]

In early 1984 environmentalists were pointing to the federal Superfund
program as a potential solution to the problem of local inadequacies.
SVTC argued that local agencies "simply do not have sufficient resources
to solve---much less control---our toxics crisis."^["Groundwater Toxics
Crisis in Silicon Valley," Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition Press
Release, 1, Folder 3, Box 11, Santa Clara County Center for Occupational
Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records,
MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State University Library Special Collections &
Archives.] The occasion also allowed Ted Smith, Michael Belliveau, and
Peter Cervantes-Gautschi to criticize the EPA's seemingly slow response
to the crisis.^[Belliveau claims that the EPA knew about the presence of
contaminated water since 1979 but made no moves to require cleanup of
toxic chemicals until 1984.  EPA documents seem to confirm the
organization knew about contamination sites in 1979. "EPA explains what
it's doing," *Times Tribune*, August 17, 1984, Folder 8, Box
12, Santa Clara County Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and
Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose
State University Library Special Collections & Archives; Environmental
Protection Agency, "Superfund National Priorities List Sites in the
South Bay," July 1986, 1, Folder 114, Box 4, League of Women Voters,
San Jose/Santa Clara chapter Records, MSS-2006-09-01, San Jose State 
University Library Special Collections and Archives.] Although the EPA had
identified fifteen to twenty sites as eligible for the National Priority
List (NPL), "not a single site has been listed . . . as a superfund
site," Smith complained to Representative Norman Mineta. SVTC appealed
to the EPA through the "imminent hazard" provision of Superfund, but was
notified that the Valley's toxics problem did not qualify. To Smith, any
threat to drinking water should convey an immediate "imminent hazard"
and an immediate release of emergency funds.^[Letter from Ted Smith to
Norman Mineta, July 23, 1984, 2, Folder 3, Box 11, Santa Clara County
Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics
Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State University
Library Special Collections & Archives; "No More Poison In Our Water"
flier, Silicon Vally Toxics Coalition, Folder 3, Box 11, Santa Clara
County Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics
Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State University
Library Special Collections & Archives; "Waste Sites on Coast Debated,"
*New York Times*, August 19, 1984. See also Smith oral history,
Berkeley, 23.] Smith's criticisms of the organization was echoed by
residents. Barbara Fenster, who lived near the IBM leak in San Jose,
asked: "EPA stands for Environmental Protection Agency. I'd be glad to
know what part of the valley the EPA protects, because it sure isn't
drinking water."^["EPA explains what it's doing," *Times Tribune*,
August 17, 1984, Folder 8, Box 12, Santa Clara County Center
for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition
(SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State University Library
Special Collections & Archives.]

The Bay Area demanded more help. In an August 1984 letter to William
Ruckelhaus, the director of the Environmental Protection Agency, and
Carole Onorato, the chairwoman of the California State Water Resources
Control Board, Representative Norman Mineta wrote to express his
"extreme concern over the growing problem of hazardous waste leaks in
Santa Clara County." Mineta cut to the chase: the EPA's site-by-site
evaluation of Superfund sites was inadequate and too slow-moving. Mineta
argued that leaks threatened the health of "several hundred thousand
local residents" and called for "immediate action" to "place the entire
Santa Clara Valley on the Superfund National Priority List." The leaks
were difficult to identify and the near inability to map the size and
number of plumes meant that "contaminants have continued to spread
unchecked." Despite collaboration between federal, state, and local
officials, Mineta concluded, "effective action cannot begin without
Superfund assistance.  The cost of clean up is simply too great, and
time is too short, to rely solely on local and state agencies."^[Letter
from Norman Mineta to William Ruckelshaus and Carole Onorato, August 7,
1984, Folder 3, Box 11, Santa Clara County Center for Occupational
Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC) Records,
MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State University Library Special Collections & Archives. See also "Waste Sites on
Coast Debated," *New York Times*, August 19, 1984.] The Bay Area's
pollution landscape was no longer though of as localized to specific
neighborhoods. The problem had become so great that many thought of the
entire place as contaminated.^[The Regional Water Quality Control Board
also called on the EPA to view the entire Peninsula as a single
Superfund site. See also "EPA explains what it's doing," *Times
Tribune*, August 17, 1984, Folder 8, Box 12, SVTC records,
SJSU.]

![Bay Area Superfund sites (large circles) and toxic leak sites. Map by author. Interactive version is at http://dissertation.jasonheppler.org/visualizations/companies/](figures/bay_superfund_sites.png)

The EPA announced in May 1986 that six out of nineteen investigated
sites of Bay Area would be added to the National Priority List. AMD,
Intel, Raytheon, and Westinghouse became declared Superfund sites in
Sunnyvale, Mountain View, and Santa Clara.^[Environmental Protection
Agency, "Superfund National Priorities List Sites in the South Bay,"
July 1986, 1, Folder 114, Box 4, League of Women Voters, Santa Clara
chapter Records, MSS-2006-09-01, San Jose State University Library 
Special Collections and Archives.] By 1990 the EPA listed twenty-nine
Superfund sites on the National Priority List, twenty-four of which
resulted from the mishandling of chemicals by high tech industries.

### Arsenic Valley

A similar approach to the Bay Area's pollution landscape focused on air
pollution. The anti-toxics environmentalists, in contrast to the
mainstream liberal environmentalists and their concern over smog,
focused their attention on the presence of toxic gases used by the
technology sector. Like water, air pollution had become a political
issue by the mid-1960s. Air quality monitoring began in 1955 with 250
stations established in American cities throughout the nation by 1961.
Early air quality efforts, under the U.S. Public Health Service (PHS),
were mainly concerned with the presence of smog. According to
mid-century experts, smog threatened both human and non-human nature.
Three main air pollutants were identified as significant
health hazards in the 1960s---asbestos, mercury, and beryllium---and
came under federal regulation under the 1970 Clean Air Act. Throughout
the decade the EPA expanded its list of air pollutants that could
introduce hazardous to the public.^[@hays1987beauty, 195--197.]

Various gases are used for the manufacturer of semiconductor chips. The
chemical element silicon cannot carry electricity. At an atomic level,
silicon leaves no space for electrons to carry electrical currents and
naturally works as an insulator. In the manufacturing process of silicon
chips and wafers, manufacturers adjust the chemical properties of
silicon by adding or subtracting electrons that allows it to carry an
electrical charge. Adapting the silicon to carry a charge involves a
process called "doping" with "dopant gases"---arsine, phosphine, boron,
and other metal hybrids---in which silicon wafers are exposed to gases
that give them electrical conducting properties.^[N.A. Downie,
*Industrial Gases* (New York: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1997, 396-397;
Roland Albert Levy, *Microelectronic Materials and Processes* (New York:
Kluwer Academic, 1989), 6--7; Ted Smith oral history, Berkeley, 53--54.]
Throughout Silicon Valley manufacturers stored compressed doping gases.
The concern of environmentalists did not revolve around a lack of
regulation regarding potentially toxic gases. Rather, environmentalists
feared what would happen to the Bay Area in the event of an earthquake
or fire. Bay Area manufacturers lacked smokestacks, but stored vast
quantities of chemicals.^["Toxic gas leak is 'inevitable,' doctor
warns," *San Jose Mercury News* June 6, 1982, Folder 5, Box 10, Santa 
Clara Center for Occupational Health (SCCOSH) and Silicon Valley Toxics 
Coalition (SVTC) Records, MSS-2007-04-06, San Jose State University 
Library Special Collections and Archives.]

![*Silicon Valley Toxics News* 7 (Winter 1989).](figures/revolution_1989_toxics_news.png)

Concerns about the presence of toxic gases on the Peninsula led SVTC and
the SCCFCA to pursue a second toxic model ordinance focused on the
regulation of gases in 1986. Under a \$100,000 budget granted to them by
a state bill proposed by Assemblymen Ernest Konnyu of Saratoga and Byron
Sher, the fire chiefs' drafted a model bill that laid out similar
guidelines as those contained in the Hazardous Materials Ordinance three
years earlier. The draft bill called on businesses to report the type
and volume of gases stored on their property, inform nearby communities
of what materials they stored on-site, and install an alarm system to
alert neighboring communities in the event of a gas leak. Businesses
would be exempt from the alarm system if their storage containers were
double-walled and they maintained air purification systems around
storage tanks.^["Toxic Gas Proposal Stirs Row," *San Jose Mercury News*,
August 8, 1986; "Fire Chiefs Seek Toxic Gas Controls," *San Jose Mercury
News*, July 8, 1986.] For anti-toxics activists and state officials,
gas leaks could be more threatening than liquid chemical leaks. Leaking
liquids can be detected and spread slowly enough that they could be
contained and managed, but gas leaks are instantaneous and spread
rapidly.^["Gas leaks, contaminated water are top priorities on the list
of threats," *San Jose Mercury News*, December 31, 1989.]

Just as Love Canal gave water contamination a sense of urgency, the
deadly gas leak by Union Carbide outside Bhopal, India, in late 1984
that killed more than 2,000 people provided a political impetus for the
Bay Area's toxic gas regulation. The Konnyu-Sher bill for funding a
draft ordinance passed in the shadow of the Bhopal Incident, one of the
worst industrial accidents of the twentieth century. The Bhopal Disaster
occurred in December 1984 when Union Carbide's pesticide plant
experienced a failure of a holding tank that released thirty metric tons
of methyl isocyanate within an hour. The resulting cloud drifted
southward over Bhopal. Within days, nearby trees dropped all of their
leaves, thousands of animal carcasses needed disposal, and nearly
200,000 people received treatment at hospitals. A Bhopal-like disaster
was the nightmare scenario for the Bay Area's anti-toxics
environmentalists and only confirmed the need for additional
regulation.^[On the Bhopal disaster, see @jasanoff2007bhopal;
@jasanoff2007bhopal.]

The potential of a toxic gas leak reshaped how environmentalists thought
about space. Whereas the presence of water contamination focused on
specific places, the release of gases obliterated any sense of space
affected by pollution. One study by San Jose State University using the
EPA's air models found that a gas leak in the Bay Area had the potential
to spread as far as twelve-and-a-half miles.^["Report Warning of
Disaster Readiness at Silicon Valley," *New York Times*, February 25,
1987; Smith, oral history, Berkeley, 53.] Such a leak would nearly
encompass the entire city of San Jose and would certainly cover the
narrow stretch of land between the Pacific Ocean and the San Francisco
Bay. Although difficult, water-borne chemical plumes could be mapped and
cleaned-up. The instantaneous release of gases, however, meant that
specific space mattered less.

Industry immediately rejected the guidelines of the new ordinance,
arguing that the fire chiefs' plan was too strict and costly to
implement. A second draft created in collaboration between industry and
Bay Area cities assigned hazard classification to toxic gases, required
new storage and alarm systems for detecting and responding to accidental
leaks, and a system of neutralizing emission gases before their release
into the air. The law extended to to common gases like chlorine and
ammonia, meaning municipal facilities, sewage treatment, and swimming
pools were subject to the law's regulations.^["Landmark Toxics Law Up
for OK in Valley," *San Jose Mercury News*, January 9, 1989; "Toxic
Containment the County, Industry and the Public Cooperated in Writing is
a Worthwhile Plan," *San Jose Mercury News*, January 22, 1990; "Toxic
Gas Law Adopted," *San Jose Mercury News*, January 31, 1990; "Palo Alto
Gets Tough on Toxics," *San Jose Mercury News*, March 28, 1990.] By
1991, all cities in the Bay Area had adopted the ordinance.

-----

End-of-the-century environmental justice advocates insisted on the
spatiality of health. The attention given to bodies, ecology,
pollution, and justice, as Linda Nash has noted, drew upon earlier
notions of environmentalism from the 1960s. Rachel Carson and others had
insisted that anyone could fall ill to the modern environment, but
environmental justice advocates took those claim further. Environmental
and structural factors, rather than the individuality of genetics, poor
hygiene, poor sanitation, or chance, were pointed to as causes for
disease. By pushing the claim that health and environment went
hand-in-hand, justice activists went beyond the middle-class and
suburban concerns of Carson and others. Justice advocates saw in the
geography of pollution a racial and class bias that disproportionately
affected non-white and poor communities. While they might agree with
Carson's claim that nobody was immune to the modern environment's
potential dangers, they saw a specific geography that offloaded
pollution to certain communities while government and business turned a
blind eye.^[@nash2006inescapable, 203--204. See also
@klingle2007emerald; @pulido1996justice; @pulido2000racism;
@bullard1990dixie; @hurley1995inequalities; @pellowpark2002dreams.]

Silicon Valley's justice advocates argued that the spatial pattern of
health emerged from a particular form of land use. Rather than seeing
the landscape as a place for business or a place for pleasure, the
landscape was redefined as a place for health (or lack of it). Within
this perception of the landscape, the Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition
and others saw Santa Clara Valley as contaminated. The use of the land
for business, however clean and modern it had appeared, proved to
generate a dangerous landscape. The presence of sick bodies or the
potential for adverse health formed a critique of the modern environment
that was spatialized.

Certain places in the landscape were more dangerous than others, a point
activists insisted upon as evidence for rendering the "clean" landscape
as a perpetual failure. Human bodies became indicators of a specific
kind of landscape where bodies were inextricably tied to contaminated
waters and polluted air. The locality of the polluted landscape had
repercussions through local, county, regional, state, and federal law.
Proximity to businesses mattered, but even communities seemingly distant
to the location of industrial parks and business centers could be
affected by migrating chemical plumes or the explosive release of gases.

But by the end of the century, activists no longer saw specific places as
polluted spaces. Criticisms of industrial pollution no longer focused on
MEW or Los Paseos. Instead, justice advocates saw the entire San
Francisco Peninsula as a place under threat. "The danger is that if this
can happen in Mountain View, it can happen anywhere in the valley,"
Smith told the *San Jose Mercury News* in 1986.^["Toxics at Deep Level,"
*San Jose Mercury News*, May 4, 1986.] By thinking of the entire
region as a Superfund site, by acknowledging the difficulty in tracking
the spread and size of chemical plumes, and the recognition that toxic
gas releases would recognize no discernible boundaries, environmental
justice advocates perceived Silicon Valley as a landscape burdened by
the anxiety of illness.

-----

"We thought we were living with a clean industry," Lorraine Ross told a
reporter from the *San Francisco Chronicle*.^[Newspaper clipping,
"Silicon Valley's Fear Over Tainted Water," *San Francisco Chronicle*,
May 16, 1983, Carton 20, Folder 12 Hazardous Waste, California
Tomorrow Records, MS 3641, California Historical Society.] Indeed, a
key selling point for promoters and boosters of the Bay Area's new high
technology sector was the cleanliness of such manufacturing facilities.
The language of booster promotion attached the language of "clean," the
absence of smokestacks, and the prohibition of noise and emissions to
their materials. Preventing pollution was a very real goal for
promoters.

But the booster's claims for "clean" industry referred to aesthetics. The
process of producing the components that would run the computers of the
future were far from environmentally friendly. "I remember thinking
about smokestacks in other industries," Mayor Janet Hayes recalled, "I
didn't expect this problem in my own backyard."^[Quoted in
@pellowpark2002dreams, 76.] IBM, Fairchild Semiconductor, and other
companies did not belch smoke into the air but the use of highly toxic
chemicals---trichloroethane, chlorinated solvents, heavy metal
gases---produced serious health problems causing damage to circulatory
and reproduction systems, liver and kidney failure, and cancers. As
investigations by state and federal officials uncovered widespread
chemical spills and the EPA declared Superfund sites, the perception of
clean industry declined while creating an environmental justice wing of
the environmental movement in the Bay Area. The "clean" industries in
the garden permanently altered land and human bodies.

