---
title: Chapter Outline
author:
- Jason A. Heppler
---

**Chapter 1: Nature, History, and the Origins of the Countryside**: The first chapter sets the stage, examining the created landscape most sought after by business and suburbanites: the orchards. The early story here examines the arrival of Europeans to the Valley and the establishment of agriculture, whose orchard trees were viewed by many---newcomers and old-timers alike---as a veritable paradise.

**Chapter 2: The Nature of Business**: The natural world not only mattered to suburbanites; it also mattered to business. Silicon Valley's high-tech economy was sold as a clean alternative to the industrial East and Midwest, so appeals to nature were wrapped up in the Valley's earliest high-tech industries. But nature also mattered for attracting the kind of white-collar, middle-class workers that these industries wanted.

**Chapter 3: A Home in the Countryside:** This chapter moves through the 1940s and 1950s, focusing on San José to explore growth politics and early conservation efforts to urban sprawl and the loss of farmland. Suburbanites wanted homes in the countryside, but thus contributed to the very process they later criticized: the vanishing aesthetic beauty of the Santa Clara Valley. Growth politics begin to falter by the end of the 1950s, although their vision ultimately carries through for the rest of the century. But certain places of the city are given more attention than others, in particular working-class and minority neighborhoods largely overlooked in the suburban process. The class and racial underpinnings of environmental politics come to the fore here, in particular as Latinos organize and craft their own vision of the suburban landscape.

**Chapter 4: A Place for Nature**: This chapter moves into the 1970s to examine the rise of anti-growth and no-growth politics alongside the rise of open space advocacy. The chapter covers the 1960s and 1970s, diving into controversy around Stanford University's plans around the Stanford Industrial Park and the reactions of neighboring suburban communities to the university's plans for industrialization. The chapter charts some of the professionalization of environmental activism that emerged in northern California through the establishment of organizations like California Tomorrow, People for Open Space, and the Committee for Green Foothills.

**Chapter 5: Rejecting the Los Angeles of the North**: This chapter continues through the 1970s, charting the eventual creation of new environmental and urban regulations that halted the growth-as-progress ideology that had dominated so much of the Valley in the immediate postwar era. Women in particular play a key role, entering into city and county government and helping to reshape the environmental politic around neighborhoods and communities.

**Chapter 6: The Tap Water Rebellion**: The final chapter ends in the 1980s and 1990s, focusing on the contamination of soil and water by industrial solvents. For the first time, Valley residents confronted the reality that the supposed "clean industry" of high tech relied heavily on chemicals and gases harmful to humans. The final chapter traces the evolution of environmental politic as organizations began to consider, for the first time, environmental justice, labor, and health (rather than its previous focus on aesthetics, conservation, and recreation).
