---
title: Chapter Outline
author:
- name: Jason A. Heppler
...

### Chapter 1: The Valley of Heart's Delight: Space in Conflict 

The first chapter will set the stage for the story by examining the 
overlapping landscapes that come into conflict in the mid-twentieth century. I 
argue that we can understand Silicon Valley's environmental history by looking 
at how three competing landscapes -- suburban, industrial, natural -- 
overlapped and went through various efforts at redefinition throughout the 
twentieth century. I place the history of Silicon Valley into the 
historiography of space and place, arguing that how people defined and remade 
space mattered greatly in the Valley's evolution during the postwar era.

### Chapter 2: "Carved from a Forest of Fruit Trees": Farmland, Suburbs, and the Environmental Limits of Growth Politics

The second chapter focuses on the City of San Jose in the 1950s to examine the 
origins of growth politics and early conservationist reactions to urban sprawl 
and the loss of open space. I also play with the idea of "aesthetic capital," 
arguing that sprawl was not just a result of municipal leader's greed but also 
resulted in the desires of suburbanites who wished to leave near nature.

### Chapter 3: Machines in the Garden: Suburban Environmentalism and Stanford Industrial Park

Moving north up the Peninsula, this chapter focuses on Stanford University in 
the 1960s and the communities surrounding the university. I examine, in 
particular, the Stanford Industrial Park and the growth of the high tech 
industry and suburban reactions to industrialization. I argue that Stanford 
inadvertantly launched an environmental movement by pushing the industrial 
development of foothills, hillsides, and farmlands, locations prized by 
neighboring communities in Los Altos Hills, Menlo Park, and Palo Alto.

### Chapter 4: A Place for Nature: Growth, Open Space, and Anti-Growth Politics

This chapter moves into the 1970s to examine the rise of anti-growth and 
no-growth politics and open space advocacy. Simultaneously, this chapter 
charts the professionalization of environmental activism in northern 
California through the establishment of organizations such as California 
Tomorrow, People for Open Space, and the Committee for Green Foothills. 

### Chapter 5: Something in the Soil: Toxics, Health, and the Collapse of Clean Industry

The final chapter ends in the 1980s and 1990s, focusing on the contamination 
of soil and water by industrial solvents. For the first time, Valley residents 
confronted the reality that the supposed "clean industry" of high tech relied 
heavily on chemicals that are harmful to humans. The final chapter traces the 
evolution of environmentalism in the Bay Area as organizations began to 
consider, for the first time, environmental justice, labor, and health (versus 
the previous three decades that focused on aesthetics, conservation, and

recreation).
