---
title: "Introduction"
author:
  - name: Jason A. Heppler
    email: jason.heppler@gmail.com
...

Wallace Stegner no longer recognized Santa Clara Valley in 1965. From his home 
in the foothills of the Santa Cruz Mountains, the Stanford creative writing 
professor lamented the urban sprawl that had overtaken the Valley. "The 
orchards that used to be a spring garden of bloom down the long trough of the 
Santa Clara Valley," he wrote, "have gone under so fast that a person absent 
for five years could return and think himself in another country. . . . The 
once-lovely coast hills reaching down the Peninsula below San Francisco have 
been crusted with houses in half a lifetime, the hilltops flattened, whole 
hills carried off to fill the bay, the creeks turned into concrete storm 
drains."[^cf1] In Stegner's lifetime, the Valley had transformed from prime 
agricultural land to being better known for its urban sprawl, traffic jams, 
and industrial complexes. 

Frederick E. Terman interpreted the landscape differently. The Stanford 
University provost and dean of engineering saw suburbanization and expansion 
of industry in the Santa Clara Valley not as signs of degradation, but rather 
signposts towards a new prosperous future for Stanford, for Santa Clara 
County, for California, and for the nation. The newly-founded Stanford 
Industrial Park and the lands around the university, rather than seen as 
encroaching sprawl, were, in the words of one booster, a "pleasant place" of 
"broad lawns, employee patios, trees, flowers and shrubs, walls of glass, 
recreational clubs" that stood in contrast to the "smoke-stacks, noise, coal 
cars, soot and other things" found in the industrial East and Midwest.[^cf2] 
The landscape appeared campus-like and suburban, amenities that reflected the 
values of Stanford and surrounding suburban communities. Although complaints 
of traffic and air pollution had become common by the mid-1960s, Terman 
dismissed these complaints. The Industrial Park had done much for the Bay 
Area's economy, and Terman felt congestion and air pollution were "really a 
pretty small price to pay."[^cf3]

These competing visions of the Santa Clara landscape reflected widely-held and 
conflicting ideas about the future of the Valley. In the face of residential 
growth and industrial development, the Santa Clara Valley's landscape changed 
remarkably. The arrival of machines in the Valley --- bulldozers and computers 
--- transformed the landscape, and in the process sparked local environmental 
activism. Valley residents, business leaders, city officials, and university 
administrators vied over the definition of Santa Clara Valley's future, and in 
the process shaped debates about environmental change. Unrestricted urban 
growth and economic development characterized much of Santa Clara Valley in 
the latter half of the twentieth century, but little told is the story of the 
environmental consequences of Silicon Valley and those who attempted to shape 
the region's environmental future.[^cf4] California voters became increasingly 
aware of the environmental impact urban and industrial development was having, 
leading by the 1970s to residents attempting to curtail industrialization, 
limit urban growth, and reject large-scale water projects. Environmental 
organizations, formal and ad hoc, such as the Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition, 
Friends of the Earth, Sierra Club, and California Tomorrow, began criticizing 
high technology firms and city leaders for their ignorance of ecological 
negligence. These organizations formed the evolving Bay Area environmental 
movement.

<!-- Each generation remade the park through an understanding of nature that
sprang from its own recreation activities. But who were these hikers, climbers,
and campers, and what drew them to Yosemite? How did their environmental
attitudes shape their understandings of what was and was not acceptable within
the park? .... Such stories underscore the human aspect of Yosemite, and provide a deeper understanding of the importance of tourism and the West’s changing cultural landscapes. -->

What gives rise to the environmental movement in the Santa Clara Valley are 
the spatial and cultural politics stemming from high-tech industrialization.

By exploring the ways people created space, the politics they engaged in to 
protect that space, and examining the physical changes to the landscape this 
dissertation argues for the importance of understanding how space creates 
politics. The story of Silicon Valley told here is over who's place the Valley 
would become: Industrial powerhouse? Fertile and beautiful? Residential 
paradise? Metropolitan leader?

The metropolitan region of the Santa Clara Valley allows for an important 
inquiry into postwar environmentalism. The Bay Area in many respects 
anticipated the environmental politics that played out on the national stage. 
Ten years before federal laws regulated clean air, water contamination, and 
the preservation of open space, environmental political actors in the Bay Area 
organized to preserve their quality of life, the preservation of landscapes, 
and formed critiques of environmental degradation.[^cf5]

## Historiography

Historians of the American West have offhandedly noted the importance of the 
information revolution to the region's development, but have done little to 
dive into the history. William Robbins noted almost two decades ago the 
"explosive expansion of the high-tech sector" that there existed "a new rural 
West---centered in the information revolution" were transforming urban 
prosperity and suburban poverty. Earl Pomeroy's posthumously published The Far 
West in the Twentieth Century includes a brief history of the semiconductor 
industry and its outgrowth from military investments.

Scholars that have focused on the history of the Valley have tended to focus 
on key people, cultural and political reactions, or the social consequences of 
the Valley's development. John Findlay was among the first western historians 
to place Silicon Valley into historical context, writing about how people 
created, and were affected by, urban culture. In particular, Findlay analyzes 
how urban environments were planned, built, managed, and used, and how 
inhabitants made sense of cities. Findlay's analysis used Silicon Valley as 
one of his case studies, focusing on Stanford University and suburban 
landscapes. Margaret O'Mara extended the story in one of her case studies 
analyzing the success and failure of places that attempted to replicate the 
Valley's success. O'Mara focused on how Stanford University played an 
important role in shaping land-use policies in Palo Alto and surrounding 
communities, and contextualizing the reasons behind Silicon Valley's success 
owing to pleasant climate, a white-collar workforce, the space to expand 
suburban areas, and proximity to a research university. Geographer AnnaLee 
Saxenian compared the differences between the Bay Area's Silicon Valley and 
Boston's Route 128.[^cf6]

Other writers and observers have attempted to draw lessons from Silicon 
Valley's growth and development, but tend to highlight the contributions of 
significant individuals. Tech journalist Robert Cringely, historian Leslie 
Berlin, biographer Walter Isaacson, journalist Michael S. Malone and other 
popular writers have highlighted the importance of specific individuals in 
shaping the technology industry.[^cf7] 

Historians have begun to explore the social and cultural consequences of 
Silicon Valley. Glenna Matthews addressed issues of gender, labor, and class 
in Silicon Valley. Matthews focuses her lens on immigrant women who worked in 
canneries and high-tech industries to "test [the] reality behind the [area's] 
glitzy image." Her focus on unionization of workers and their efforts towards 
social justice illustrates a dimension of the story not otherwise told. On 
issues of race in Northern California, Stephen Pitti examined Mexican 
Americans and the long history of race relations and labor issues in the Bay 
Area. Cecilia M. Tsu examined the agricultural past of Santa Clara Valley, 
studying Asian immigrants in Santa Clara Valley to examine the overlapping 
ideologies of race, gender, and labor between 1880 and 1940. These works have 
helped to uncover the story of Silicon Vally often ignored or unknown --- race 
relations, social justice, labor, gender, and politics.

Histories of environmental politics often trace the origins of the 
environmental movement to the 1960s, lumping the movements into the 
generalities of the counterculture, civil rights, and justice movements. But 
in the Bay Area, these ideas took hold nearly a decade sooner. The origins of 
an ecological consciousness and energy for political action in Santa Clara 
Valley suggests energies and ideologies that predated much of the nation's 
eventual environmental sentiments.[^cf8]

The political and cultural story intertwines with a spatial story. The Santa 
Clara Valley was the site of one of the nation's greatest modernizations of 
urban space. More than 138,000 acres of farmland were paved over, built upon, 
unearthed, or buried between 1940 and 1960, all in an effort to support an 
expanding high tech industry and its rapidly growing workforce.[^cf9]

Space forms a critical understanding the history of Santa Clara Valley. Within 
space, as Robert Self writes in his analysis of Oakland, people "competed to 
put those resources to use to create particular and concrete places."[^cf10] 
Space is not just an abstract consideration of a place, but rather is 
historically concrete --- the growth of suburban factories, residential and 
commercial growth, and environmental politics all operated in space and place. 
Historical actors and their spaces they operate in are inseparable. The 
experiences of people, communities, and institutions take place in the very 
fabric of life and space. The calls for urban reform, environmental concerns, 
and critiques against industry did not take place abstractly; political actors 
made specific demands about specific places. Space does not tell the entire 
story, but overlooking space is to miss a significant part.[^cf11]

Richard White argues that space is elastic, and argues that it's above all 
defined by movement. He draws on Henri Lefebvre: space isn't static waiting to 
be filled or structured beyond human shaping; rather, space is created out of 
interactions of humans with other elements of the natural world and built 
environment. (Spatial History Project)

Timothy Mahoney, Robert O. Self, Richard White, and other historians have 
applied spatial narratives to their framework. This work does the same. 

## The Natural Landscape

The Santa Clara Valley lies between two branches of the Coast Range mountains. 
The Santa Cruz mountains to the west are covered in coastal redwoods that give 
the mountains a green vail all year long. The Diablo Range to the east remains 
dry and khaki brown for most of the year except during the short rainy season. 
The Mediterranean climate of the Bay Area means the region receives little 
rainfall outside the period between November and April. On average, the 
semiarid Valley receives about fourteen inches of rain annually.[^cf12] The 
Coastal Range shields the Santa Clara Valley from frosts and major storms, and 
temperatures rarely drop below freezing or become excessively warm, although 
conditions of droughts and excessive rainfall have occurred.[^cf13] The Santa 
Clara Valley's climate, John Muir remarked when passing through in the spring 
of 1872, was "the best we ever enjoyed."[^cf14]

Hydrologically, the area is crossed by several streams and rivers that snake 
their way down the mountains. Historically, the majority of these water 
sources never created deep channels, often forming shallow pathways that were 
prone to flooding. Most mountain runoff quickly dissipated into well-drained 
alluvial soil and replenished groundwater aquifers. Freshwater marshes, 
seasonally-flooded meadows, forested wetlands, and riparian habitats were 
common historical features on the valley landscape.[^cf15] In addition to 
overland water sources, the valley is supplied by a regional aquifer that 
consisted of multiple Pleistocene aquifers grouped into upper and lower 
systems. These groundwater systems were replenished primarily through 
precipitation, stream channels, and, today, by artificial recharge ponds. The 
presence of rock faults also serve as potential sources and barriers of 
hydrological flows[^cf16]. The Valley has few rivers coursing through it. 
Twenty-six major creeks flow through the valley, and the major rivers flowing 
through the Valley include the Arroyo Hondo, Guadalupe River, and Pajaro 
River, which originate in the Santa Cruz or Diablo Range mountains and empty 
into the Calaveras Reservoir, the San Francisco Bay, and the Pacific Ocean 
respectively. A majority of the thirty-seven lakes that exist in Santa Clara 
County are artificial or serve as reservoirs. Two major dam projects, the 
Coyote Dam in 1936 and the Anderson Dam in 1950, began regulating watershed 
discharge. Recent changes in vegetation and habitats came about due to changes 
in stream hydrology that included flood control efforts and summer water 
releases from groundwater recharge associated with the Coyote and Anderson 
dams.[^cf17]

![Reconstructed land cover map of the valley floor along Coyote Creek prior to heavy human modification. Robin M. Grossinger et al., "Historical Landscape Ecology of an Urbanized California Valley: Wetlands and Woodlands in the Santa Clara Valley," Landscape Ecology 22 (December 2007): 112.](figures/ecoregions.png)

The valley hosted a variety of lifeforms. Along the valley floor, oak scrub, 
cacti, and accompanied by a variety of oak, willow, sycamore, and alder trees 
provided cover for wildlife and shelters for native grasses. At higher 
elevations, a variety of conifers including coastal redwoods (*Sequoia 
sempervirens*), ponderosa pine (*pinus ponderosa*), sugar pine (*pinus 
lambertiana*) mingled with white fir (*Abies concolor*) and black oak 
(*Quercus kelloggii*) that carpeted the mountains in green. The plants of the 
Valley adapted to the Mediterranean climate: perennial bunchgrasses die back 
every winter, leaving only roots to help preserve water; oak trees have 
extensive root systems to tap into groundwater supplies.[^cf18] The oak 
woodlands and chaparral ecoregions provided habitats for acton woodpeckers, 
nuthatch, oak titmouse, and Pacific pallid bats. Major waterways supported a 
diverse range of native fish species, including Pacific lamprey (*Lampetra 
tridentata*), steelhead trout, chinook salmon, Sacramento blackfish, and tule 
perch, among many others. Golden beavers and raccoons shared the landscape 
with rabbits, squirrels, and other small species, as well as a variety of 
snakes, lizards, spiders, and insects. Mountain lions, wolves, and grizzly 
bears once hunted and lived in the valley, mingling with ungulates such as elk 
and mule deer. Woodpeckers, wrentits, scrub jays, Chestnut-backed Chickadees, 
and hundreds of additional bird species thrived in the Valley's skies.

The landscape Muir observed was just beginning to shift under the influence of 
humans.^[Muir notes the appearance of orchards, wheat fields, vineyards, and 
alfalfa meadows. Muir, *John Muir*, 96.] The exceptional growing climate, 
fertile soil, and plentiful water from artesian wells allowed farmers to 
transform the landscape into the fruit capital it would be known as 
worldwide.^[By the 1920s, Santa Clara Valley led the state in fruit 
production, drying, canning, and packing, providing a range of products such 
as cherries, prunes, apricots, pears, peaches, plums, and apples. By 1930, 
Santa Clara County produced between one-third to one-half of the world's prune 
supply. Matthews, *Silicon Valley*, 18; Tsu, *Garden of the World*, 17.] The 
cultivation and processing of apricots, prunes, pears, and cherries became 
staples on the horticulture landscape.^[Edward N. Torbert, "The Specialized 
Commercial Agriculture of the Northern Santa Clara Valley," *Geographical 
Review* 26 (April 1936): 247–263.] Fruit trees produced a canopy of pink and 
white blossoms along with orange California poppies and other native 
wildflowers that bloomed on the hillsides. The blooming seasons were popular 
early in the twentieth century as visitors flocked to the area to behold the 
orchards in full bloom, along with farmhouses, berry patches, vegetable 
gardens, and pastures. Little wonder why the Santa Clara Valley boosters 
advertised the area as "nearest Paradise" and "the best spot in the whole 
earth," a place where "the Eden of vine and tree" was a "God-favored spot" and 
"God's favorite valley."^[Quotes from Tsu, *Garden of the World*, 3-4. 
*Picturesque San Jose and Environments: An Illustrated Statement of the 
Progress, Prosperity, and Resources of Santa Clara County, California* (San 
Jose: H. S. Foote and C. A. Woolfolk, 1893), n.p.; *The Progressive City 
Beautiful: Santa Clara* (Santa Clara Chamber of Commerce, n.d.); E. Alexander 
Powell, "The Valley of Heart's Delight," *Sunset* 29 (August 1912), 120.]

![Blossom tours in the Santa Clara Valley were widely popular. Tours took place several times per year depending on which trees were blooming. Source: "Blossomtime Tours: Santa Clara Valley Routes PC, ca. 1953," Greater San jose Chamber of Commerce, Santa Clara History Center Collection, Santa Clara City Library.](figures/blossomtours.png)

Cattle ranching, wheat and grain production, and quicksilver mining flourished 
in the Valley in the nineteenth century prior to the Valley becoming "one vast 
orchard."^[Quoted in Tsu, *Garden of the World*, 17.] By the end of the 
ninetieth century, fruit production had surpassed all other agricultural, 
mining, and timbering activity. The growth of Silicon Valley occurred upon 
some of California's most fertile lands. A survey by the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture designated 400 square kilometers --- 32 percent --- of Santa Clara 
County as Class 1 land, the highest ranking possible for the cultivation of 
fruits and vegetables. Water systems flowing into the valley carved out rich 
alluvial fans in the Valley. Below topsoil loam --- in some places measuring 
forty feet deep --- are gravel and clay freshwater aquifers, which nineteenth 
century farmers reached with artesian wells that provided a consistent supply 
of fresh water.^[Aaron Sachs, "Virtual Ecology," *World Watch*, 15.] Santa 
Clara Valley farms remained relatively small. In 1900, the typical farm was 
under fifty acres; in 1920, the average farm size as forty acres and dropped 
to thirty-two acres by 1950.^[Tsu, *Garden of the World*, 6.] Agricultural 
activity by the 1940s witnessed around 6,000 farms in the Valley, mostly 
family-run operations, that totaled around 132,000 acres and some eight 
million cherry, apricot, and pear trees.^[Sachs, "Virtual Ecology," *World 
Watch*, 16.]

<!--keep this para as transition -->When Wallace Stegner lamented the disappearing beauty of "this brief Eden," it 
was this human-built landscape he looked upon.^[Stegner quoted in Michael 
Friedly, "This Brief Eden: A History of Landscape Change in California's Santa 
Clara Valley," Ph.D. Dissertation, Duke University, 8.]

## The Urban Landscape

The San Francisco Peninsula followed --- and in some ways led --- the nation's 
shift in population moving westward. The location of World War II military 
facilities drew millions to the Far West.  California also followed another 
wartime trend --- the militarization of industry. The twentieth-century 
American West, according to Kevin Fernlund, "bristled with airfields, army 
bases, naval yards, marine camps, missile fields, nuclear test sites, proving 
grounds, bombing ranges, weapons plants, military reservations, training 
schools, toxic waste dumps, strategic mines, transportation routes, lines of 
communication, laboratories, command centers, and arsenals." The burgeoning 
industrial and military landscape in the West demanded a population to support 
it. California alone accounted for the most dramatic increase in population 
due to the militarization of its economy.^[Roger Lotchin notes that cities in 
California had already acquired a long history of military development prior 
to World War II. Every port city along the California coast had a naval, army, 
and air bases before the start of World War II. Militarization was a 
fundamental component to California's major cities. This was also true of 
Seattle. Lotchin, *Martial Metropolis*, 223-232; Lotchin, *Fortress 
California*, 1-2; Greg Hise, *Magnetic Los Angeles*, 117-120; Matthew Klingle, 
*Emerald City*, 205-211.]

Postwar prosperity encouraged widespread growth across the country. By the 
1950s many American cities experienced widespread growth, but what was 
initially seen as a fulfillment of the American dream of homeownership became 
viewed as an environmental disaster. Critics took aim at suburban growth and 
environmental destruction, and nowhere was this change more obvious than in 
the West. Metropolitan growth doubled the population in the region between 
1940 and 1960. By the 1980s, the region was among the fastest growing in the 
nation.^[On environmental concerns over suburbanization see Kenneth T. 
Jackson, *Crabgrass Frontier*; Adam Rome, *Bulldozer in the Countryside*.] 
Many westerners were unsettled by population growth, and raised concerns about 
the disappearance of rural landscapes being replaced by sprawl.^[On the 
emergence of sprawl in the Bay Area, see Richard A. Walker and Matthew J. 
Williams, "Water from Power," *Economic Geography*: 95-119; Margaret Pugh 
O'Mara, *Cities of Knowledge*, pp. 57-94.] Western political leaders such as 
Oregon Governor Thomas McCall condemned what he called "sagebrush suburbs" and 
sought limits on urban growth in the state. Anti-growth and environmental 
sentiments lay behind Bay Area residents placing new limits on urban growth 
and condemning boosters that supported plans for urban expansion.

The Bay Area witnessed some of the most dramatic urban growth. During the 
1940s, Santa Clara County experienced 66% growth in population, compared to a 
California wide growth of 53%. By the 1950s those figures surged upward; the 
population increased 121% in Santa Clara County compared to 49% statewide. 
Subdivisions sprang up to accommodate the influx of new residents. Most of 
these new subdivisions were located beyond existing city boundaries in 
unincorporated areas. Between 1945 and 1950 county farmland decreased from 
727,000 acres to 589,000 --- a reduction of 81%.^[Rebecca Conard, "Green Gold: 
1950s Greenbelt Planning in Santa Clara County, California," *Environmental 
Review* 9:1 (Spring 1985): 6.] During that same period, Bay Area cities 
engaged in rapid annexations. San Jose annexed land thirty-two times between 
1945 and 1950. During the same period, the City of Santa Clara annexed only 
four tracts, but in 1951 annexed six tracts and another nine in 1952. Santa 
Clara added 50 acres to the city in two years. In the same two year period, 
San Jose annexed sixteen parcels that totaled over 1000 acres.^[Rebecca 
Conard, "Green Gold: 1950s Greenbelt Planning in Santa Clara County, 
California," *Environmental Review* 9:1 (Spring 1985): 6.] Between 1945 and 
1970, San Jose approved over 1,400 annexations and expanded the city's 
footprint from fifteen square miles to 135 square miles. The city's land area 
expanded by 900 percent.^[Cavin, 231; Matthews, "The Los Angeles of the North: 
San Jose's Transition from Fruit Capital to High-Tech Metropolis"; Matthews, 
*Silicon Valley, Women, and the California Dream*, 7; Trounstine and 
Christensen, *Movers and Shakers*, 93; "Annexations by Year"; "City Size by 
Year," 2011, City of San Jose Planning Division.]

## Industrial Landscape

The costs of this negligence became most obvious in the 1980s, when cancer 
clusters and birth defects emerged among residents in San Jose. Investigators 
traced the source of the illnesses back to Fairchild Camera and Instrument 
Company, whose solvents waste storage tanks had leaked 60,000 gallons of 
solvent toxics into groundwater supplies.^[Local and federal studies 
discovered that trichloroethane, a common industrial solvent used in the 
cleaning of semiconductor parts, was leaking out of storage takes and into 
groundwater. The problem was not limited to Fairchild; other high technology 
manufacturers had similar issues. Health effects of consuming the contaminated 
water ranges from liver and kidney damage, skin rashes, birth defects, and 
cancer. "U.S. to Study Pollution in High-Technology Area," New York Times, 
October 30, 1983, p. 33. For a summary of the history regarding groundwater 
contamination, see Craig E. Colten, "A Historical Perspective on Industrial 
Wastes and Groundwater Contamination," Geographical Review 81 (April 1991): 
218-223.] The water in the aquifers remain unusable today.

*Who shapes American environmental policy?* Do mainstream organizations like 
the Sierra Club dominate environmental policy, or do grassroots organizations 
deliver the most energy behind environmental politics?  To tell this story, I 
look at grassroots organizations, local and regional groups, and ad hoc 
coalitions that emerged to shape environmental politics. In Silicon Valley, 
numerous organizations emerged in response to environmental issues arising 
from urbanization and industrialization. 

Emergence of citizen's groups
- Not the well-known environmental politics (Sierra Club, etc), but 
residential groups who opposed what they saw as rampant, unplanned expansion.

Writing about environmental politics in the Bay Area also offers us ways to 
think about local politics. It might, as Richard Hofstadter once said, have 
"something to say that might help us."^[Hofstadter quoted in Christopher 
Lasch, "Consensus: An Academic Question," Journal of American History 76 
(September 1989): 458.] The story here is, ultimately, about the practice of 
politics in postwar America. Around kitchen tables, within advocacy groups, in 
letters and newspaper editorials, people talked about the changing landscape 
around them. At stake was over who would define the new environment. Amenities 
and cultural ideals about the Bay Area --- climate, atmosphere, suburban, 
middle class --- had attracted newcomers and delighted old-timers. But the 
rise of industry, the influx of new residents, the explosion of suburban 
development, and the devastation of orchards led both groups to question what 
sort of changes they were welcoming to the Valley. 

Simultaneously, entrepreneurs, urban planners, university administrators, and 
city leaders offered an alternative vision to the landscape: one that was 
increasingly urban and industrial. Often times support for growth was couched 
in the language of national defense: Cold War defense spending poured into 
Stanford University, which eagerly sought out military contracts in research 
and development. Stanford administrators responded to citizens critiques of 
land development programs by dismissing their concerns as less important than 
national defense concerns. "Something something," Wallace Sterling, the 
President of Stanford between 1949 to 1968, told one resident, "something 
something something."

Unrestricted urban growth and economic development characterized much of Santa 
Clara Valley in the latter half of the twentieth century. California voters 
became increasingly aware of the environmental considerations urban growth and 
industrial development had for the region, leading to political activism, new 
environmental regulation laws, and community referendums. Furthermore, 
environmental groups such as Friends of the Earth, the Sierra Club, the 
Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition, California Tomorrow, and United Palo Altans 
began criticizing high technology firms and city leaders for their ignorance 
of ecological negligence.^[On the rise of the modern environmental movement, 
see Samuel P. Hays, *Beauty, Health, and Permanence: Environmental Politics in 
the United States, 1955-1985* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987), 
pp. 13-19; Hal Rothman, *Saving the Planet*, pp. 131-159; Ted Steinberg, *Down 
to Earth*, pp. 239-261; John Opie, *Nature's Nation*, pp. 404-433.]

The urban expansion of the Bay Area and its demands for water resources 
coincided with the growing environmental movement in America. Beginning in the 
1960s, environmental groups like Sierra Club became politically active. The 
Wilderness Act of 1964 likewise brought greater attention to the nation's 
environmental issues. By the late 1960s, the environmental movement had become 
"a mass movement organized around cleaner air and water for all, not just in 
wilderness areas."^[Ted Steinberg, *Down to Earth*, p. 240.] Books about the 
environment became best sellers, notably Rachel Carlson's *Silent Spring* and 
Paul and Anne Ehrlich's *The Population Bomb*. Other legislative actions, 
including the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and the Clean Air Act 
and Clean Water Act, reflected growing concerns over environmental 
issues.^[Hays, *Beauty, Health, and Permanence*, pp. 13-39; Opie, *Nature's 
Nation*, pp. 404--433; Rothman, *Saving the Planet*, pp. 131-159; Steinberg, 
*Down to Earth*, pp. 250--257.] Despite Lenihan's claim of the environmental 
movement's absence, the movement was indeed active in the Valley and expressed 
itself not only through advocacy groups but through California voters who 
rejected new large-scale water projects, urban development programs, and 
industrial growth plans that were not sensitive to ecological concerns.

The research is undergirded by digital history methods, in particular the 
project seeks to utilize textual analysis and spatial analysis to more deeply 
understand the political, cultural, and environmental issues at stake.

My own thinking in digital methods has been deeply influenced by my time as a 
graduate student at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and working as the 
Academic Technology Specialist and affiliated staff at the Center for Spatial 
and Textual Analysis at Stanford University. Both locations taught me to think 
prudently about digital research methods, and Stanford especially forced me to 
think more about uncertainty and incompleteness in historical data, and the 
problems that attend these issues when visualizing historical evidence. 

Digital history and the visualization of historical evidence, according to 
Richard White, is deeply scholarly. White notes that

> Visualization and spatial history are not about producing illustrations or 
> maps to communicate things that you have discovered by other means. It is a 
> means of doing research; it generates questions that might otherwise go 
> unasked, it reveals historical relations that might otherwise go unnoticed, 
> and it undermines, or substantiates, stories upon which we build our own 
> versions of the past.^[Richard White, "What is Spatial History?" Spatial 
> History Project 
> <http://www.stanford.edu/group/spatialhistory/cgi-bin/site/pub.php?id=29>.]

The work is also an attempt to democratize the past. Silicon Valley has become 
a cultural center in the United States; the wealth, political influence, 
environmental precedence, and place in the American imagination has led the 
Valley to take on a mystical quality. Cities and universities across the 
country and across the world try and mimic the success of the Valley and 
Stanford. The Valley is synonymous with the technology industry, an industry 
that has taken on ever increasing importance to the nation's economy. By 
asking new questions of the Valley's cost, this work's digital component seeks 
to probe the public to think more about Silicon Valley and its attendant 
costs. 


[^cf1]: Wallace Stegner, "The Clouded Skies of Lotus Land," *St. Louis Post-Dispatch*, September 26, 1965. Stegner's novel *All the Little Live Things*, was written based on the Valley. The novel's character, Joe Allston, lamented the bulldozers, subdivisions, and scars that cut into the Earth. Remarking on the work of the fiction's land developer, Allston remarked that the hills were "mutilated and ruined" and "only a land butcher could have proposed and carried it out. . . . There would be no restoring what he had ruined. It reminded me too painfully; it made me sick to look." Stegner, *The Little Live Things*, (New York: Viking, 1967), pp. 14-15.

[^cf2]: Quoted in Findley, *Magic Lands*, 130.

[^cf3]: Terman, quoted in Findlay, *Magic Lands*, 141.

[^cf4]: On the rise of the modern environmental movement, see Samuel P. Hays, *Beauty, Health, and Permanence: Environmental Politics in the United States, 1955-1985 *(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987), pp. 13-19; Hal Rothman, *Saving the Planet*, pp. 131-159; Ted Steinberg, *Down to Earth*, pp. 239-261; John Opie, *Nature's Nation*, pp. 404-433.

[^cf5]: Can I back up this claim? O'Mara?

[^cf6]: John Findlay, *Magic Lands: Western Cityscapes and American Culture After 1940* (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992), 117-159; Margaret O'Mara, *Cities of Knowledge: Cold War Science and the Search for the Next Silicon Valley* (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2005); AnnaLee Saxenian, *Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route 128 *(Harvard: Harvard University Press, 1996).

[^cf7]: Michael S. Malone, *The Valley of Heart's Delight: A Silicon Valley Notebook, 1963-2001* (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2002); Malone, *Betting It All: The Entrepreneurs of Technology* (New York: Wiley, 2001); Malone, *Bill & Dave: How Hewlett and Packard Built the World's Greatest Company* (New York: Portfolio, 2007); Cringely, *Accidental Empires: How the Boys of Silicon Valley Made Their Millions, Battle Foreign Competition, and Still Can't Get a Date* (New York: HarperBusiness, 1996); James Wallace, *Hard Drive: Bill Gates and the Making of the Microsoft Empire* (New York: HarperBusiness, 1993); David A. Kaplan, *The Silicon Boys: And Their Valley of Dreams* (New York: William Morrow, 2000); Leslie R. Berlin, "Robert Noyce and Fairchild Semiconductor, 157-1968," *Business History Review* (Spring 2001): 63-100. Very few of these books address issues of women or gender, often reflected in the book titles. On the centrality of women and gender in the history of computing, see *The Computer Boys Take Over*; *When Computers Were Human*.

[^cf8]: I am not alone in suggesting the Bay Area anticipated the broader environmental movement. Historian Margaret O'Mara has noted that the Bay Area became "home to some of the environmental movement's most important early battles and precedent-setting land-use planning measures." O'Mara, *Cities of Knowledge*, 139.

[^cf9]: Rebecca Conard, "Green Gold: 1950s Greenbelt Planning in Santa Clara County, California," *Environmental Review* 9:1 (Spring 1985): 5.

[^cf10]: Self, *American Babylon*, 17.

[^cf11]: Self, *American Babylon*, 17.

[^cf12]: "Water made the orchards, silicon chip industry sprout faster," *San Jose Mercury*, December 22, 1999.

[^cf13]: Friedly, 20.

[^cf14]: John Muir, *John Muir: His Life and Letters and Other Writings*, ed. Terry Gifford (Seattle: Mountaineers, 1996), 96.

[^cf15]: Robin M. Grossinger et al., "Historical Landscape Ecology of an Urbanized California Valley: Wetlands and Woodlands in the Santa Clara Valley," *Landscape Ecology* 22, no. 1 (December 1, 2007): 110–115.

[^cf16]: R. T. Hanson, Zhen Li, and C. Faunt, Documentation of the Santa Clara Valley Regional Ground-Water Surface-Water Flow Model, Santa Clara County, California. U.S. Geological Survey Scientific Investigations Report 2004-5231. (Reston, VA: U.S. Geological Survey, 2004).

[^cf17]: L. McKee, J. Leatherbarrow, S. Pearce, and J. Davis, "A Review of Urban Runoff Processes in the Bay Area: Existing Knowledge, Conceptual Models, and Monitoring Recommendations," SFEI Contribution 66 (Oakland: San Francisco Estuary Institute, 2003); Robin M. Grossinger et al., "Historical Landscape Ecology of an Urbanized California Valley: Wetlands and Woodlands in the Santa Clara Valley," *Landscape Ecology* 22, no. 1 (December 1, 2007): 110–115.

[^cf18]: Friedly, 20.

[^cf19]: 

[^cf20]: 

[^cf21]: 

[^cf22]: 

[^cf23]: % The Natural Landscape

The Santa Clara Valley lies between the Santa Cruz mountains to the west, covered in coastal redwoods that give the mountains a green vail all year long, and the Diablo Range to the east, dry and brown for most of the year except during the short rainy season. The Mediterranean climate of the Bay Area means the region receives little rainfall outside the period between November and April. On average, the semiarid Valley receives about fourteen inches of rain annually.^[“Water made the orchards, silicon chip industry sprout faster,” San Jose Mercury, December 22, 1999.]

Hydrologically, the region is fed by several rivers and aquifers.

How is it described?
- The Ohlone Indians (name for the valley?)
- Spanish explorers (name for the valley?)
- Americans

{{Ungulates include antelope and mule deer, who are hunted by mountain lions. Rabbits, squirrels, and other rodents proliferate throughout the valley, along with a variety of lizards, and other insects. Ravens and sparrows thrive in the valley.}}

Invasive plant species?

Any ranching? Farming? How does it change the ecology?

Each culture shaped the landscape through a vision of what they hoped to accomplish. (Indian, Spanish, American)…

How does the ecology/landscape look by 1945?

--

Santa Clara Valley lies between the Santa Cruz mountains to the west and the Diablo Range to the east, a tightly compact area spanning {# miles}. Hydrologically, the region is fed by several rivers and aquifers. 

The Mediterranean climate of the Bay Area means the region receives very little rainfall outside of the period between November and April. Around seven percent of California land in 1951 was agricultural, and around half of that land required consistent irrigation.^[@blaney_use_1951: 189.] On average, the semiarid Valley receives about 14 inches of rain annually.^["Water made orchards, silicon chip industry sprout faster," *San Jose Mercury*, December 22, 1999.]
% The Urban Landscape

The modern American West is defined by western responses to urban migration and the reorganization of metropolitan places after World War II. During the war 8 million Americans migrated West, and 22 million arrived over the next twenty-five years. More than 90 percent of these new arrivals lived in towns, cities, and suburbs.^[Amy Scott, "Urban Environmentalism," *Political Culture of the New West*, 255.]

The San Francisco Bay Area is among the most highly populated places in the United States. 

Role of technology companies in shaping urban space.^[Scholars have pointed to high tech industrialization and its role in shaping cities. See @mayer2005tektronix, @omara2005cities.]
% The Industrial Landscape

Research parks

Stanford

Arrival of industry / perception of “clean”

Design / architecture is important to this — there’s an image of industry, carried over from Stanford’s aesthetics 

The industrial landscape / built environment and cultural influences on this landscape

(Also — clearly an interest in landscaping in terms of trees, grass, lawns, shrubs, etc)
