---
title: Machines in the Garden: Suburban Environmentalism and Stanford Industrial Park
author:
  - name: Jason A. Heppler
    affiliation: University of Nebraska-Lincoln
    email: jason.heppler@gmail.com
date: April 18, 2014
bibliography: master.bib
...

> "Palo Alto is half bedroom suburb, half futuristic 1970s science fiction
> movies. . . . The big thing about Palo Alto is that, as a city, it designs
> tons of incredibly powerful and scarry shit inside its science parks, which
> are EVERYWHERE."
>
> Douglas Coupland, *Microserfs* (1995)

> "This is your land we are talking about."
>
> Bernard DeVoto

Stanford Industrial Park opened its doors in 1951. Carved out in the southeast
corner of Stanford's vast land holdings on the San Francisco Peninsula, the
industrial park marked the emergence of the university's drive to suburbanize
its campus, determine nonacademic uses for its lands, and forge close links to
government and industry. Scientific funding by the federal government alone was
rising rapidly in the 1950s. In 1955, federal expenditures on basic research
topped $286 million, a figure that jumped to $693 million by 1960 and, just five
years later, topped $1.6 *billion*. The total research and development budget of
the federal government had grown from 8 percent to twelve percent in just ten
years.^[@omara2005cities, 47.] Stanford Industrial Park was the most outwardly
facing result of university drives to enter new markets.

## Aspirations for Stanford

World War II and the location of defense industries along the West Coast drew
thousands of new residents to California in search of jobs after decades of
economic depression.^[On the great migration to California, see the book on
Okies, etc.] Between 1940 and 1947, the nine counties of the Bay Area became
home for 676,000 more people, 330,000 new jobs, and $2.5 billion more in annual
income.^[@omara2005cities, 103.] The Cold War science complex, anchored by the
Stanford Industrial Park, added an additional influx of people and capital to
the region. The region's population more than doubled by 1960.^[U.S. Bureau of
the Census, 1960 Census, Santa Clara County, n.d., census.abag.ca.gov; U.S.
Bureau of the Census, 1970 Census, Santa Clara County, n.d., census.abag.ca.gov;
U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1980 Census, Santa Clara County, n.d.,
census.abag.ca.gov.] In 1950, Santa Clara County alone counted 800 factory
workers, which jumped to 264,000 manufacturing workers and more than 3,000
electronics firms by 1980.^[@abbott2008cities, 181.]

Industrialization drove the new influx of residents. Along the Peninsula, cities
sought out new ways to attract industries to the area in order to capitalize on
new economic growth. Bay Area governmental associations, including the Bay Area
Council (BAC) and the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG), sought to make
California an industrial center not by replicating the industrial Northeast or
Midwest but by promoting new industries.^[@omara2005cities, 106.]

Anxieties over suburban growth and issues of clean air and water, open space,
sprawl, and pollution defined environmental politics against its preservationist
history. Postwar environmentalism largely became issues over quality-of-life as
new worries about chemicals used in products, pollution of water resources,
pesticides, and overrun national parks became key political issues. The
publication of bestselling books, including Stewart Udall's *The Quiet Crisis*,
Rachel Carson's *The Silent Spring*, and Paul Ehrlich's *The Population Bomb*,
made the case for greater regulation of growth and pollution. The passage of new
legislation embodied new attempts to protect land, air, and water, such as the
Wilderness Act of 1964, the National Environmental Policy Act of 1970, the
creation of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Clean Air Act of 1972, and
Endangered Species Act of 1973.

Against this backdrop, rapid growth in western cities encouraged new concerns
about their environmental impact, which had the effect of changing local and
regional politics. World War II defense industries, Cold War military and
industrial buildup, and tourism and recreation encouraged the growth of western
cities, and, while growth brought new prosperity and wealth, it also unsettled
westerners who watched rural landscapes vanish under four-lane highways, parking
lots, office buildings, and residential developments. By the 1960s, some
westerners began pushing back against the tide of change and fueled new
antigrowth and environmental politics throughout the region. Comprised mostly of
middle-class professionals, suburban liberals and conservatives found common
ground over environmental damage, uncontrolled growth, poor planning and
development, trampled wilderness, and disappearing open
space.^[@childers2010ski, 70-72.]

Quality-of-life and antigrowth activists argued that uncontrolled growth lay at
the center of the West's social and environmental problems. Air pollution, loss
of open space, damaged wilderness areas, industrialization, and urban sprawl
threatened the very qualities that led millions of Americans to move West after
World War II. The region's vast public lands, economic opportunities, and clean
air, activists argued, were under threat by the continuous growth characterizing
western metropolitan areas. By the 1970s, westerners began arguing for limits on
growth in order to protect their quality of life.^[@childers2010ski, 72.]

## Industrial Parks in the United State

Stanford Industrial Park emerged amid changes in postwar industrial
architecture.^[The best accounts of Stanford Industrial Park's planning and
development are in @omara2005cities and @findlay1993magic.] Thirty-three
industrial parks existed in the United States in 1940, quickly rising to 307 by
1957. The increase in industrial parks coincided with them becoming less likely
to locate within cities, leading to 75 percent of parks built after World War II
being located in areas whose populations were between 25,000 and 500,000 people.
By the 1950s, parks were locating outside of city centers and instead found
homes in suburbs, allowing firms in the parks to take advantage of a nearby
workforce, new tax benefits, avoiding traffic congestion, bypassing old
infrastructure, and locating out of reach from unions in older industrial
cities. Although many firms remained in city centers to take advantage of
certain benefits -- proximity to services such as public transportation -- many
located themselves in suburban areas.^[1957 Dept of Commerce report;
@omara2005cities, 66.] The suburbanization of industry led land developers to
adhere to higher standards in urban design. The real estate consultancy Arthur
D. Little, Inc., noted in 1958 that industrial parks were organized according to
"a comprehensive plan" designed to "insure compatibility between the industrial
operations therein and the existing activities and character of the community in
which the park is located." These parks were designed according to "proper
setbacks, lot size minimums, land/use ratio minimums, architectural provisions,
landscaping requirements, and specific use requirements" in order to maintain
a "harmonious integration into the neighborhood."^[Quoted in @omara2005cities,
65.] The principles of open spaces, architectural uniformity, and land use
restrictions shaped the spatial influence parks had on suburban areas.

Affluent suburbanites were willing to take advantage of new tax revenues and job
opportunities present in new industries, but were unwilling to accommodate those
industries if they had an affect on their quality of life. Smokestacks, traffic
congestion, and air or noise pollution would not be tolerated, and new
industries were quick to point out that their brand of industrialization would
not carry such blemishes on the landscape. A 1958 pamphlet from the Palo Alto
Chamber of Commerce noted that, just a few years after the opening of the
Stanford Industrial Park, the city was "a well planned community with
a favorable atmosphere for light industry"^["Light Industry in the Palo Alto
Area," 1958, Folder 5 Palo Alto History, Box 5 ARCH-1990-052, Stanford
University Land Use Planning Office, SUA, p. 1.]

Industry had another reason to locate near suburban areas: to strengthen its
ties to research institutions. <!-- expand -->

## "The Miracle of Palo Alto"

The railroad baron and businessman Leland Stanford and his wife, Jane, founded
the university in 1891 in the memory of their son Leland Stanford, Jr., who died
at age fifteen from typhoid fever. The Leland Stanford Junior University was
established on Leland's vast farmland -- nearly nine thousand acres of prime
agricultural land -- and bestowed all of the land to the university, which could
lease the land however it saw fit but could never sell it. The university was
the largest land holder on the Peninsula, and would own the Farm permanently.
For sixty years after the university's founding, the Farm would remain just that
before becoming some of the most valuable land in the country.  Most of the land
was leased to farmers and ranchers and the rolling foothills would largely
remain undeveloped until mid-century.^[@omara2005cities, 102; @findlay1993magic,
120.]

The Second World War and the Cold War introduced a surge in the population of
the Bay Area.  The towns around Stanford grew rapidly during and after World War
II as middle-class families moved to the area to take advantage of new defense
and related industries. Menlo Park grew from a town of 3,000 to 27,000 between
1940 and 1960, while Palo Alto grew from under 17,000 to 52,000 in the same
period. To Stanford's chagrin, however, most commercial activity located
elsewhere on the Peninsula. The majority of commercial development around
Stanford were retail and services.^[@omara2005cities, 107.] If Stanford was to
become the center of a new western economy, they needed new industries. They
found those industries from technology firms that started in the area, including
Hewlett-Packard and Varian Associates.

The spatial distribution of industry followed a postwar trend in industrial
design and development. Industry no longer developed in central cities as it
historically had. Rather, industrial manufacturing sought cheaper and more
spacious outlying lands that had adequate space for parking, loading facilities,
and room for plant expansions. Industries also sought more amenable work
environments. City ordinances in the latter half of the twentieth century began
pushing industry to less desirable areas of cities, while industrial facilities
sought the same amenities as suburbanites: a pleasant environment, suburban
neighborhoods, distance from urban problems, and lower taxes, while remaining in
proximity of city services and infrastructure.^[@findlay1993magic, 120.]

Stanford never ran short of potential tenants attracted to the suburban design
of the park and its proximity to the university. The university privileged those
companies working in high technology and medicine -- and thus contributed to
Stanford's educational and research programs -- and welcomed several companies
to the park, including Eastman Kodack, Varian Associations, Hewlett-Packard,
Syntex Pharmaceutical, and Lockheed Missiles. The park grew quickly as its
reputation spread. In 1955, only seven tenants occupied fifty-three acres of the
industrial park. By 1962 the number had jumped to forty-two tenants occupying
360 acres (around half of the available space) and employed 11,000 people. By
1970, the number of tenants had reached fifty, occupied 500 acres, and employed
17,000 people. The rents generated tremendous profits for the university, by
1978 reaching an annual profit of $4.3 million, while also generating another
$13.5 million in tax revenue and utility payments for the city of Palo
Alto.^[City of Palo Alto, Calif., *Palo Alto Comprehensive Plan, 1977-1990*
(Palo Alto, 1976), 15; @findlay1993magic, 140.]

The development of Stanford Industrial Park marked the emergence of the modern
West: a region less reliant on what economist Thomas Michael Power called "folk
economics" <!-- define this -->  and more reliant on postindustrial economies of
tourism and technology.^[@power1996landscapes, 19-21. <!-- WHAT ELSE ON
TOURISM?-->] The economic shift meant a cultural shift as well. As farmland,
pastures, and ranches became subdivisions, technology companies, research firms,
and service industries, the new economic activity began to reshape how people
thought about the Valley.  Namely, the expansion of industry carried with it
a contentious debate about the effects of industrialization on the Valley's
landscape and a debate over how it would be shaped.^[On postwar suburban growth,
see @jackson1985crabgrass; @fishman1987bourgeois, 155–81; @abbott1998frontier;
@duany2001suburban; @nicolaides2002heavan; @gutfreund2004sprawl.] By the late
1950s residents in Palo Alto began seeing the industrial park as a threat to
their suburban lifestyles, especially visible through increased traffic,
industrial development of the foothills, contributions to air and noise
pollution, and rising housing costs. In 1960, these concerns boiled over and,
inadvertently, helped launch an environmental movement on the Mid-Peninsula.

<!-- IDEA: Lets de-emphasize Terman; he's cited everywhere, by O'Mara, Findley,
the celebratory works. The real work of building the Valley came from Terman,
Alf Brandin, the Board of Trustees, and Colbert Coldwell (real estate advisor).
-->

## Stanford University, Suburban Environmentalism, and the Battle of the Hills

<!--
STANFORD IS A SYMPTOM OF A LARGER ISSUE?
- Problems of regional planning
- Urban sprawl
- The need for local and federal action to conserve land/water
- Thus, organizations like California Tomorrow don't necessarily emerge as
a direct result of Stanford (unlike Committee for Green Foothills) but they are
part of a larger conversation happening in the Bay Area about growth and
planning.

REMEMBER: competing ideas of a hybrid landscape: built for industry vs. built for nature
-->

Widespread concerns over the environmental impact of the West's rapid growth and
new industrial economies shaped regional and local politics. The economic and
infrastructural changes wrought by World War II, the militarization of western
industry, and the growing recreational and tourism economy led to breakneck
metropolitan growth throughout the region between 1940 and 1960. Westerners
witnessed diminishing rural lands, growing suburbs, and four-lane highways,
giving rise to a cultural and political backlash throughout the region that
manifested itself in antigrowth activism and quality-of-life politics. Largely
comprised of middle-class professionals, metropolitan growth and environmental
and social problems identified by growth and quality-of-life activists lay at
the center of their motivations. The millions of Americans coming to western
states like Colorado, Oregon, and California since World War II came to take
advantage of these state's air quality, federal public lands, recreation, and
economic opportunities. By the 1960s, however, newcomers and old-timers alike
believed too many people were moving in and threatening their quality of
life.^[On quality-of-life politics, see @abbott2008cities, 205;
@carney2007suburbanizing: 480-481; @scott2008hip, 253--255; @childers2010ski,
71-73.]

In California, rapid growth brought prosperity to the state, but by the 1960s
Californians were questioning these benefits. In 1960, a short but intense fight
over the proposed industrial development of the Stanford foothills to the
southeast of the main campus marked the beginning of a cultural and political
shift in the Bay Area. Stanford announced in January plans to expand foothills
development southward from the existing Industrial Park. In particular, Stanford
received interest in industrial construction from the Ampex Corporation,
a manufacturer of high-end sound recording and broadcasting electronics, to
build a new research facility in the foothills. Surrounding neighborhoods,
however, fiercely opposed the development on Stanford's property, leading to
a referendum campaign that Stanford President Wallace Sterling referred to as
"the Battle of the Hills."^[Margaret O'Mara provides an excellent account of the
Battle of the Hills in Cities of Knowledge. O'Mara argues for the importance of
this event towards understanding how Stanford understood itself as an urban
planner rather than community concerns that arose from environmental issues. See
@omara2005cities, 135-139.]

In 1960, roughly six-hundred acres of undeveloped university land lay between
Junipero Serra, West Fremont, Arastradero, and Page Mill Roads. Originally zoned
for residential development according to the Santa Clara County Master Plan,
Stanford administrators decided to rezone the land as light industry without
consulting or seeking approval from the county or surrounding neighborhoods. To
rezone the land, procedure dictated that Stanford offer the land to Palo Alto
for annexation. The Palo Alto city council and planning commission, then, had
the authority to rezone the land. The process meant the land would remain
controlled by Stanford policies, taxes collected by the city, and the land could
be leased to industrial developers.^["Decision now will determine future," *Palo
Alto Times*, February 11, 1960, 16.]

![Map of the proposed foothills development. *Palo Alto Times*, March 18, 1960.](figures/map_foothills.png)

Electronics manufacturers had already sought out the area as prime real estate
for establishing research facilities, taking advantage of nearby residential
neighborhoods for employees to live, proximity to researchers at Stanford and
the Industrial Park, established city infrastructure, and a favorable tax
climate. In early 1960, Ampex and General Telephone and Electronics Laboratories
Corporation (GT&E) announced plans to build or expand their operations in the
Stanford foothills both north and south along Page Mill Road, in part to take
advantage of the proposed route of the Junipero Serra Freeway.^["Ampex plant
just first in Stanford plan," *Palo Alto Times*, January 14, 1960, 2;
"Electronics research plant planned for foothills area," *Palo Alto Times*,
January 28, 1960, 1; letter from Wallace Sterling to Gordon Johnson, March 16,
1960, FF8, Box A29, SC 216, SUA.] Additional development plans were laid out for
a new shopping center and luxury homes development in the Palo Alto-Los Altos
Hills foothills.^["103 are foothill plan told," *Palo Alto Times*, January 29,
1960, 1-2.]

Residents had few objections for the proposed residential and shopping center
development in the foothills; the ire of residents turned to Ampex and
industrialization.  Ampex's proposed eighty-acre development location ran up
against resistance from neighboring communities, fueling quality-of-life and
environmental politics in surrounding neighborhoods. The proposed site ran along
the Los Altos Hills city line and raised concerns among property owners and Los
Altos Hills city officials, who feared the loss of scenic beauty and the
residential ambiance of the area.^["Decision now will determine future," *Palo
Alto Times*, February 11, 1960, 16.] Furthermore, residents were growing
suspicious of Stanford's role as a land developer. One resident summed up the
issue saying, "there has been growing concern over Stanford's policy of
presenting pre-packaged zoning requests. . . . They resemble closely the tactics
of many a Land Developer asking for variances from planned uses."^[Morgan
Stedman, text of prepared meeting with Sterling, March 14, 1960, FF11, Box A29,
SC 216, SUA. Quoted in O'Mara, *Cities of Knowledge*, 136.] Another resident
wrote the Stanford Trustees urging the foothills to remain closed to industrial
development: "The Peninsula is already too crowded -- therefore, new industry
should not locate here."^[Letter from Mrs. H. Wilson to Stanford Trustees, March
4, 1960, FF8, Box A29, SC 216, SUA.] Palo Alto resident Richard Bell in a letter
to Sterling lamented the "program of land exploitation pursued by the school
during the past ten years" which has "succeeded . . . in eliminating much of the
natural beauty and attraction . . . [that] contributed so much toward making
Stanford the top school in the west."^[Letter from Richard Bell to Wallace
Sterling, August 2, 1960, FF8, Box A29, SC 216, SUA.]

Complaints of potential industrialization of the foothills reflected not only
arguments about the area's beauty, but also the noise and air pollution that
accompanied development. In a letter to the Palo Alto Times, Morgan Stedman,
a member of the Santa Clara County Planning Commission, argued that new
foothills industrialization would increase traffic flow through neighborhoods,
thus increasing smog, noise, and danger, large-scale cutting and filling of land
would be required to support new buildings, parking lots, and roads, the loss of
rainwater through runoff, and "irreparable damage to natural beauty."^[Newspaper
clipping, "Area planning seen as needed," Palo Alto Times, March 12, 1960, from
FF8, Box A29, SC 216, SUA.] Other residents expressed concern over tests being
run on their shrubs to see if radiation levels were becoming too high.

The spatial arrangements of cities and zoning shaped how residents responded to
the proposed industrialization. The majority of the foothills area were zoned
for residential or agricultural use <!-- {in what planning documents?} -->. But
encroachments of industry into these areas raised concerns about the loss of the
hills and potential hazards that industrialization would bring to surrounding
communities. Stanford's claimed that the industrialization would result in clean
and well-kept facilities. The smoke pollution of the Midwest and East would
never be present in the Valley. However, a greater concern for local residents
revolved around the issue of smog and traffic. The threat of increased traffic,
smog, concerns about the loss of the foothills pastoral beauty, and Stanford's
cavalier handling of community relations resulted in new political energy that
would spread through the community and alumni networks.^[@omara2005cities, 135.]
In a letter to Wallace Sterling, one resident summed up the attitude of many of
the area's residents:

> We now have smog, congestion, and acres of asphalt where we once had fresh air
> and freedom of movement in a beautiful countryside -- in one of the finest
> climates on earth! The responsibility for developing such a unique area should
> be in the hands of the most intelligent and PERCEPTIVE people available! There
> seems to be little concern about total environment. . . . The area sorely
> needs parks, golf courses, and low density housing. We need cultural and
> recreational centers for all age levels. A University such as Stanford could
> well promote an interest in fields that enrich life. Industrial and commercial
> interests are far from being neglected but the humanities certainly
> are!^[Letter from Gordon Johnson to Wallace Sterling, March 6, 1960, FF8, Box
> A29, SC 216, SUA.]

Ad hoc community and  environmental coalitions formed in the wake of Stanford's
announcement. Residents of Palo Alto responded to Stanford's plans to develop
the foothills by organizing the Citizens Committee on Regional Planning (CCRP)
in March. The organization, under the initial leadership of Robert Mahan, an
insurance executive from Palo Alto, began by organizing a letter writing
campaign to voice their opposition to the foothills plans. Before the group
officially organized as the CCRP, residents printed a copy of a letter in the
Palo Alto Times and urged readers to clip the letter from the newspaper and mail
the clipping to the Stanford Board of Trustees to illustrate grassroots
opposition to industrialization.^["Anti-foothill industry drive launched here,"
Palo Alto Times, March 8, 1960, 2; "Industry opponents organize, name head,"
Palo Alto Times, March 11, 1960, 1.] <!-- {What does this letter say? What's the
argument? Examples? Find this.} --> Within two days of publishing the letter,
the Stanford Board of Trustees had received 250 letters voicing opposition to
the plan; many of the letters were clipped from the CCRP's Palo Alto Times
letter.^["Industry opponents organize," *Palo Alto Times*, March 11, 1960, 1;
"13 residents protest foothill zoning change," *Palo Alto Times*, March 4, 1960,
17.]

Los Altos Hills also expressed their disapproval of the plans. Residents, irate
that their residential-only incorporation would be encroached upon by
industrialized foothills, expressed their displeasure through letters and
newspaper editorials. Mayor John Fowle and city council rebuffed Stanford in a letter to Alf
Brandin, accusing Stanford of "jeopardizing existing zoning and land
development" and charged that the university's plans are never "subject to
public scrutiny." Furthermore, contrary to Stanford's claims that it was working
with surrounding communities, Los Altos Hills was caught unaware of the
university's plans.^["Stanford foothills plans hit by Hills," *Palo Alto Times*,
February 10, 1960.]

Resistance from residents targeted the city council as well. The Palo Alto
Residents Association (PARA) called for "a vigorous campaign" against the Palo
Alto City Council's plans to allow industrial development in the
foothills.^["Residents oppose industry," *Palo Alto Times*, March 10, 1960, 1.
Residents also pointed to a potential conflict of interest relationship between
Palo Alto Mayor Noel Porter and David Packard. Porter was serving as vice
president of Hewlett-Packard at the time. See "Industry opponents organize, name
head," *Palo Alto Times*, March 11, 1960.] Resistance stemmed from the potential
for degrading the landscape. Peter Hughes, an officer of PARA, charged that
developing the foothills would destroy the landscape. Calculating that the Ampex
site would cover thirty acres of parking lot and another twelve acres for
buildings, Hughes challenged that "if anyone can lay down that amount of
building without changing the contour of the land he is an engineer the like of
which I have never seen."^["Residents oppose industry," *Palo Alto Times*, March
10, 1960, 1.]

Letters poured into Stanford. University President Wallace Sterling received
around 400 letters in opposition to the plan and only fifty in
support.^[@omara2005cities, 134.] Letters poured into the *Palo Alto Times* as
well.

For its part, Stanford pushed back by arguing that it needed to develop the
lands in order to remain profitable. Thomas Ford, staff council for the
university, claimed that he desired to see the land remain undeveloped but "the
university's need for funds makes that impossible."^["Foothills industry can be
beautiful," *Palo Alto Times*, March 2, 1960.] Stanford continued their refrain
that the development of the foothills would not become an industry blight, but
rather, in the words of Thomas Ford, would "be a thing of beauty" because of the
 design regulations enforced by Stanford.^["Foothill industry can be
beautiful," *Palo Alto Times*, March 2, 1960.] Furthermore, Stanford positioned
itself as a reluctant land developer only in the business of supporting
education and research. Alf Brandin explained to the *Palo Alto
Times* that the university was not "in the land development business per se" but
that the university was "doing everything we possibly can to produce income [to
support education]."^["Undeveloped acres prime resource," *Palo Alto Times*,
March 4, 1960.] "People should feel thankful Stanford owns the land and not
someone else," Brandin chided. "We try to look at the problems
politically, sociologically, aesthetically, and economically."^["Stanford
wouldn't do anything detrimental," *Palo Alto Times*, March 4, 1960.] Stanford
urged residents to realize the role the university had played in preserving open
space, the role residents played in causing traffic congestion, and Stanford's
road construction efforts. Without Stanford, the university seemed to argue,
none of these improvements would exist.^["Foothills industry can be beautiful,"
*Palo Alto Times*, March 2, 1960; "Stanford wouldn't do anything detrimental,"
*Palo Alto Times*, March 4, 1960; Letter from Gordon Johnson to Wallace
Sterling, March 6, 1960, FF8, Box A29, SC 216, SUA.]

A common complaint was the pastoral scenery that would disappear in the face of
industrial buildings.^[Letter from Wallace Sterling to Gordon Johnson, March 6,
1960, FF8, Box A29, SC 216, SUA.]

When letter and editorial campaigns failed to initiate the planning that
protesters wanted to see, they turned to the next available tool: the
referendum. In June a petition campaign initiated by opponents of foothills
industrialization began circulating through Palo Alto. The petition called on
the city council to rescind its decision to rezone the land for light industry
or to allow residents a vote on the issue. Four days before the rezoning
ordinance was to become official, the referendum petition was filed to the city
having collected over two-thousand signatures, above the necessary 1,000 that
was needed. Placed on the ballot for the November elections, a "yes" vote would
allow for Stanford to carry forward with its expansion of the Industrial Park and
pave the way for Ampex's research facility.^[Details about the petition's
criticisms and intent can be found in a letter from Morgan Stedman to Wallace
Sterling, June 20, 1960, FF8, Box A29, SC 216, SUA. In an explanatory sheet
given to solicitors and signers of the petition, the referendum called for
better planning of residential, industrial, and commercial areas and specifical
criticized the sudden zoning change to light manufacturing, housing and traffic
pressures that new industrialization would add to the area, the leveling of
hills to accomodate new construction, and pointed to undeveloped lots already
zoned for industry. Letter from Stedman to Sterling, June 20, 1960, FF8, Box
A29, SC 216, SUA.]

As referendum supporters were gathering signatures, additional pressure to
resist land development came from Stanford alumni. In June, a group calling
themselves the Bay Area Stanford Alumni printed an insert in the *Stanford
Review*, a weekly periodical for alumni news, accusing Stanford of ignoring land
development policies implemented by the Board of Trustees in 1958. The petition
called on Stanford to find alternatives for earning money other than "defacing
the beauty of the green and summertimes golden hills" and called on the
university to consult with the master plans of surrounding communities.^["A
Message from Bay Area Stanford Alumni to President Sterling and the Board of
Trustees," 1960, FF8, Box A29, SC 216, SUA, pp. 2-3.] Preston Burchard, the
spokesman for the group, noted the petition already had 146 signatures before
the insert ran in the *Review*. 

![Bay Area Stanford Alumni insert, 1960. Source: FF8, Box A29, SC 216, SUA.](/figures/basa_insert.png)

As the referendum campaign dragged on through the summer, editorials to the
*Times* attempted to flip complaints about the loss of the foothills upside-down.
An editorial in the *Palo Alto Times* expressed "gratitude" to Stanford for "so
generously permitting thousands of people to freely enjoy the rolling,
tree-studded hills, the lakes, and views of the campus."^[Esther B. Clark, M.D.,
Letter to the Editor, *Palo Alto Times*, March 28, 1960, FF 11, Box A29, SC 216,
SUA.] The *Times* itself continued its enthusiasm for Stanford, writing that the
community owed Stanford a debt for keeping the area's lands free of intrusive
industry.  The Times argued that Stanford's large landholdings "constituted
a free park" for Palo Alto and surrounding communities. Had these lands fallen
into the hands of private owners, they "long ago would have been converted to
the houses, business places and industries where so many of us live and
work."^[Editorial, *Palo Alto Times*, November 1960, Stanford Lands Scrapbook V,
1960-61, Subject File 1300/9, SUA.] Stanford itself was quick to remind critics
of the efforts the university had put towards city development. As Sterling
reminded one critic, overseeing the vast domain of land on the Peninsula meant
"the hills are not likely to be overrun by any commercial developments in your
lifetime or mine."^["Letter from Wallace Sterling to Gordon Johnson," March 6,
1960, FF8, Box A29, SC 216, SUA.]

Referendum supporters were not without their critics. Donald Carlson referred to
them as "malcontents in the community," and the *San Francisco Examiner*
referred to "wild-eyed claims" of the protesters.^[Letter from Donald Carlson to
Ben Allen, May 12, 1960, FF8, Box A29, SC 216, SUA; "Groups Clash over Use of
Stanford Land,"* San Francisco Examiner*, March 18, 1960.]

Too often, the city of Palo Alto happily yielded to Stanford's wishes.

Stanford administrators felt they understood the debate, or at the least could
not understand why residents were up in arms about Stanford's development plans.
Alf Brandin recalled that Stanford had an issue with semantics, arguing that "we
tried to say it has got to be clean, no smoke, no heavy manufacturing. Light
manufacturing that is clean and electronic."^[Brandin oral history, 42.]
Stanford took this to heart, renaming the Industrial Park to Stanford Research
Park shortly after the Battle of the Hills in order to avoid industrializations
association with the area. But Stanford's belief that the issue revolved around
semantics -- that the word "industry" in Stanford Industrial Park was confusing
residents -- reveals that Stanford had no understanding of citizen's real
concerns. Citizens rightfully argued that industrialization -- light
manufacturing or otherwise -- was going to have an enormous impact on the
environment. Frequently claims of "clean" industry were revealed to be false.
Complaints about light and noise pollution could be controlled to a degree by
Stanford, but other pollutants -- radiation, smog, and toxic solvents -- would
remain uncontrolled, sometimes invisible, and have greater repercussions. One
resident noted in the heat of the Battle of the Hills debate that a Lockheed
plant hear his home resulted in a "federal agency [that] has been checking the
shrubs in our back yard for radioactivity."^["Pros and Cons of Foothill Industry
Zone Debated," Palo Alto Times, April 21, 1960, 13.] No amount of planning,
architectural prowess, and top-notch landscaping could get around the visible
and invisible pollution resulting from high technology manufacturing.

## The Committee for Green Foothills

In the wake of Stanford's victory, residents of the area, increasingly concerned
that Stanford might overrun the foothills and irritated by the university's
seemingly cavalier attitude towards citizen's concerns and favoritism towards
industry, continued organizing. Among the most prominent groups to emerge was
the Committee for Green Foothills. Formed in the living room of Ruth
Spangenberg, the Committee included Stanford alumni and area professionals,
including the well-known writer and Stanford creative writing professor Wallace
Stegner and former county planner Morgan Stedman.^[Stegner oral history,
Bancroft, p. 8.] The Committee was founded, Wallace Stegner explained, because
"of things that seemed to be happening in the hills that we didn't like to see
happen" and a "fear of what Stanford might do in the hills."^[Stegner oral
history, Bancroft, pp. 7-8.]

![Board Members, Committee for Green Foothills. Front row, from left: Pat Barrentine, George Norton, Ruth Spangenberg, Lois Crozier-Hogle, Kent Dedrick, and Tom Jordan; back row: Kirke Comstock, Claire Dedrick, Larry Dawson, Marry Moffat, Mary Gordon, Paul Smith, Eleanor Boushey, Norman KcKee, Kathryn Stedman, and Morgan Stedman. Photo by Lowell Johnson. From Richard Walker, Country in the City.](figures/foothills_members.png)
